Title:Swanky cars to jewellery worth crores, what Haryana’s political dynasts have declared in poll affidavits
Date: 2024-09-16T07:38
Synopsys: While Dushyant Chautala owns a Toyota Fortuner, his brother Digvijay owns a Range Rover, BJP’s Shruti Choudhary owns a BMW X1 and Mini Cooper along with her spouse
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/what-haryana-political-dynasts-have-declared-in-poll-affidavits-9569977/
Content: 
Several of the political dynasts contesting the October 5 Haryana Assembly elections own swanky cars and gold and silver worth crores, their election affidavits show.
The richest among these dynasts is former Deputy Chief Minister and Jannayak Janta Party (JJP) chief Dushyant Chautala, who is contesting from Uchana Kalan. He has declared assets worth Rs 122.48 crore – Rs 44.03 crore movable and Rs 78.54 crore immovable – with sources of income listed in his poll affidavit as “agriculture, salary and business”. While Dushyant owns a Toyota Fortuner, he and his wife collectively own 5.6 kg of gold worth Rs 4.14 crore and diamonds worth Rs 2.63 crore.
The JJP chief’s brother Digvijay and the party’s candidate from Dabwali, along with his spouse, has declared assets worth Rs 102.17 crore. While he owns a Range Rover, the couple owns 4.6 kg of gold worth Rs 3.4 crore and diamonds worth Rs 1.96 crore. Digvijay, like his brother, has also listed “agriculture, salary and business” as his sources of income.

Arjun, Dushyant and Digvijay’s cousin and the son of Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) leader Abhay Chautala, is the party nominee from the Rania seat. He has declared assets worth Rs 45.98 crore while listing “agriculture and business” as his sources of income. He owns a Hummer and with his wife, collectively owns 2.8 kg of gold worth Rs 2 crore and diamonds worth Rs 3.9 crore.
BJP’s Tosham candidate and former CM Bansi Lal’s granddaughter Shruti Choudhary, who recently crossed over from the Congress along with her mother Kiran, owns a BMW X1 and Mini Cooper along with her spouse. Together, the couple also owns 10.95 kg of gold, diamonds, and precious stones, besides 75 kg of silver, all worth Rs 10.09 crore. She has declared assets worth Rs 104.32 crore, of which Rs 44.11 crore are movable.
Union Minister Rao Inderjit Singh’s daughter Aarti has declared assets worth Rs 68.26 crore. The BJP’s Ateli candidate, Aarti has 1.9 kg of gold worth Rs 1.29 crore besides diamond jewellery worth Rs 10.69 lakh.
Aditya Surjewala, the son of Congress’ Rajya Sabha MP Randeep Singh Surjewala and party candidate from the family stronghold of Kaithal, has declared assets worth Rs 20.09 crore and owns gold and jewellery worth Rs 91.25 lakh along with his wife.

With “business” as his source of income and total assets worth Rs 6.96 crore, grandson of former CM Bhajan Lal, Bhavya Bishnoi does not own any vehicle but collectively with his wife, the BJP’s Adampur candidate owns 1.4 kg of gold worth Rs 1.05 crore.
Chander Mohan, the Congress’ Panchkula candidate and Bhajan Lal’s son, has declared assets worth Rs 80.47 crore and is the owner of a Mercedes Benz car. With sources of income as “social work, bank interest and pension”, the four-time MLA collectively owns 1.1 kg gold worth Rs 85 lakh with his wife.
Former Union Minister Birender Singh jumped ship from the BJP to the Congress along with his son Brijendra ahead of the Lok Sabha polls. Brijendra, a former MP from Hisar, is taking on Dushyant in Uchana Kalan. He and his wife have declared assets worth Rs 26.73 crore including a Toyota Fortuner Legender and an Innova Hycross, among other vehicles. The couple also owns gold and diamonds worth Rs 18.75 lakh and Congress’ Uchana Kalan candidate has listed his sources of income as “salary, rent, interest and capital gain”.
INLD nominee from Dabwali and former Deputy PM Devi Lal’s grandson Aditya Sihag has declared assets worth Rs 26.4 crore including gold and diamonds worth Rs 1.18 crore. Anirudh Chaudhary, a former treasurer of the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) and Bansi Lal’s grandson has assets worth Rs 21.33 crore including a Toyota Fortuner and Toyota Innova Hycross besides gold and diamond jewellery worth Rs 55.57 lakh. The Congress’s Tosham nominee has listed business, consultancy and directorship in companies as his source of income.

Abhay Singh Chautala, Devi Lal’s grandson and INLD’s Ellenabad candidate, who has declared assets worth Rs 61.01 crore, owns seven vehicles including two Toyota Land Cruisers, 2.9 kg gold worth Rs 2.07 crore and diamonds worth Rs 45 lakh. He has listed “agriculture and business” as his sources of income.
Former BJP minister-turned-rebel Ranjit Singh Chautala, who is contesting as an Independent from Rania, has declared total assets worth Rs 23.98 crore. Apart from the Ford Endeavor and Toyota Fortuner, Devi Lal’s son owns gold and diamonds worth Rs 61 lakh, four buffaloes and three cows. He has listed his source of income as “agriculture, salary and pension”.
==============================

Title:Arvind Kejriwal’s decision draws Delhi Congress flak: ‘Nautanki … do not want AAP to expand too much’
Date: 2024-09-16T07:38	
Synopsys: “There is still a feeling in the Congress that Kejriwal is not to be trusted and hence, the party is cautious about him and AAP," says a Congress leader
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/arvind-kejriwal-decision-delhi-congress-flak-aap-9569952/
Content: 
While most INDIA bloc allies maintained that Arvind Kejriwal’s announcement of resignation was a decision of the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), the Delhi Chief Minister’s move brought to the fore the fissures between the Congress and the AAP. Kejriwal’s announcement came just days after talks over seat sharing between the two parties in Haryana didn’t work out, with the Congress sources saying that the AAP was “demanding too many seats”.
On Sunday, a section of Delhi Congress leaders termed Kejriwal’s announcement “nautanki (drama)”. “He is doing drama. He has no moral ground anymore. If he had any morality, he would have resigned earlier,” said Delhi Congress leader and former MP Sandeep Dikshit. Asked about the two Opposition parties being allies nationally, Dikshit said: “That is at the national level. But in Delhi, our fight is against Arvind Kejriwal.”
Echoing similar views, a senior Congress leader said the party does not want the AAP to expand too much. “They knew that an alliance in Haryana would have benefitted them. Hence, they wanted an alliance with us. But it didn’t work out. Now, for Delhi elections – whenever it happens – it will be difficult for the two parties to come together,” said the leader.

According to another party leader, Congress leader Bhupinder Singh Hooda opposed the alliance in Haryana. “While the central leadership may have some sympathy or may feel positively about the AAP, the state units are not inclined to ally with the party. The same thing happened in Haryana.”
“There is still a feeling in the Congress that Kejriwal is not to be trusted and hence, the party is cautious about him and AAP. He has announced that he will resign, but what is the motive? What impact will it have? We don’t know. Hence, we are waiting to see things pan out over the next few days,” said a senior Congress leader Sunday.
Notably, while several INDIA bloc parties welcomed Kejriwal’s bail on Friday, the Congress top leadership, including the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha Rahul Gandhi and party chief Mallikarjun Kharge, had maintained a strategic silence over the Supreme Court verdict. When asked about the court order, Congress spokesperson Supriya Shrinate had refused to “comment on it per se”. Instead, she highlighted how the “(central investigative) agencies have been misused against rivals in the past 10 years”.
The differences between the Congress and AAP notwithstanding, several other INDIA bloc parties reiterated that “central agencies were being misused by the government to target the Opposition”.

Trinamool Congress’s (TMC) Sagarika Ghose said the BJP, unable to handle electoral defeats, has tried every trick in the book to try and undermine and dislodge the AAP CM. “Kejriwal has consistently challenged and defeated the BJP in Delhi for the last decade. The BJP and the unelected Delhi LG have been interfering daily in the AAP government’s functioning and preventing an elected government from working,” she said.
Terming the resignation a “courageous step”, she said, “The BJP is repeatedly misusing central agencies like CBI and ED in a most disgraceful and unconstitutional manner to attack every opposition leader. Kejriwal has called the BJP’s bluff and shown that he remains one step ahead of the BJP”.
CPI’s D Raja shared similar views on the misuse of central agencies. However, he said the resignation is Kejriwal’s prerogative. “He will have to explain to the people why he is doing so because he is an elected person. That is between him, his party and the people.
They have not consulted INDIA bloc parties. It is their (AAP’s) independent decision. It is for the party to explain to the people what is their future course of action,” Raja said.

Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) MP Manoj Jha said there was a need to pay attention to what the court said while granting bail. “Apart from his statement (on resignation), there is a need to pay attention to that too. When Hemant Soren ji was released, what did the Supreme Court say? We need to pay attention to that. What did the court say when Arvind Kejriwal was granted bail? It is important to note what the court. It is important to see that through these institutions, the political game is being played by the BJP. I feel there will be a full stop to it. There will be an end to political vendetta started by two people in the last 10 years,” he said.
==============================

Title:One nation, one election in this term; coalition won’t stall any reforms: Govt
Date: 2024-09-16T10:10
Synopsys: Preparations started for conducting the Census, but a decision is yet to be taken on including a column on caste, says top government functionary.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/one-nation-one-election-nda-bjp-coalition-reforms-govt-9569936/
Content: 
Despite the BJP being in a minority, the NDA government will implement “one nation, one election,” in its current tenure, a top government functionary said Sunday. This, even as he insisted that “there should be no confusion about the sthayi niti (policy stability) under a government elected for a third successive term after 60 years.”
The functionary said that there is no area where the NDA government, which completed 100 days of its third term Sunday, has not taken policy decisions to continue the work it had initiated 10 years ago: “Whether it is defence, space, external and home affairs, education, Digital India and making India a manufacturing hub, spending Rs 11 lakh crore annually on building infrastructure, mahila-yuva-garib-kisan (welfare of women, youth, poor and farmers), we are continuing with and taking forward the work that was started in 2014. Even our foreign policy has a reedh ki haddi (backbone) today, which it didn’t have under previous governments”.
Since he brought in the BJP to power with a majority in 2014, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been advocating for “One Nation, One Election” — holding elections to Lok Sabha, all state Legislative Assemblies, and urban and rural local bodies (municipalities and panchayats) at the same time.

In his latest Independence Day address, too, he made a strong pitch for it, contending that frequent polls were creating hurdles in the country’s progress. A high-level committee, headed by former president Ram Nath Kovind, in March this year recommended simultaneous elections for the Lok Sabha and state assemblies as the first step followed by synchronised local body polls within 100 days.
Also read | One Nation, One Election: Highlights of the Kovind panel’s recommendations
This requires a Constitutional amendment but, as a first step, to hold the Lok Sabha and state elections together, a ratification by states will not be required for the amendment, once it is approved by Parliament. In the second step, elections to municipalities and the panchayats will be synchronised with elections to Lok Sabha and Assemblies in such a way that local body elections are held within 100 days of the elections to Lok Sabha and Assemblies. This will require ratification by not less than one-half of the states.
The source said the Government had started preparations for conducting the Census, but a decision is yet to be taken on including a column on caste. “The process will begin soon” he said. The decadal census was not conducted in 2020 due to Covid-19 Pandemic.
Check out | As caste census demand rises, why there is need for a relook at the 1931 exercise
The BJP, which won 240 seats, relies on its allies including TDP, Janata Dal-United and Lok Janshakti Party (Ram Vilas) for its majority. Questions have been raised about their support to the one nation, one election plan but BJP leaders said that all these allies are on board and “arithmetic” would not get in the way of this “reform process.”

In August, the Centre was forced to withdraw an advertisement for filling up 45 key posts in the government through lateral entry within a day of “concerns” expressed by two of its allies, the JD(U) and LJP (Ram Vilas). Earlier, with some allies, including the JD(U), LJP and TDP, wary about the widespread changes proposed in the Waqf (Amendment) Bill, the government sent the legislation to a Joint Committee of Parliament.
Now, with the ruling party fighting election in Jammu and Kashmir, the functionary also said the BJP will consider possibilities of forming the government with Independents and smaller parties. “One thing is sure – neither the PDP, the National Conference nor the Congress will not be able to form the government there. There are 33 smaller parties contesting elections there,” he said.
As a marker, sources in the government said, projects worth at least Rs 15 lakh crore have been cleared in the first 100 days in the third term of this NDA government. Of these, projects worth Rs 3 lakh crore have been green-lit with focus on roads, railways, ports, and airways.
Arguing that the idea of employment being linked to only government jobs should be “corrected,” the top government functionary said that increasing capital expenditure to Rs 11.11 lakh crore in the infrastructure sector will lead to job creation. “The disillusionment and frustration (nirasha and hatasha) among youth over jobs is not just unfair to the government that has been taking several such steps, it’s an injustice to the youth also,” the functionary said.

In the health sector, under the Ayushman Bharat scheme, the government has extended the Rs 5 lakh per year coverage to every citizen over 70 years, and this is expected to benefit 6 crore senior citizens. The government has also increased 70,000 medical seats which “should ensure that no student would have to go abroad for medical studies,” the functionary said.
==============================

Title:Today in Politics: PM Modi to flag off country’s first Vande Metro; Amit Shah to address 3 rallies on last day of phase 1 J&K campaign
Date: 2024-09-16T08:07
Synopsys: PM to also flag off Vande Bharat trains on different routes as well as lay foundation stones for development projects worth Rs 8,000 crore in Ahmedabad
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/today-in-politics-pm-modi-vande-bharat-metro-amit-shah-tripura-9569939/
Content: 
Campaigning for the first phase of the Assembly polls for the first phase in Jammu and Kashmir, scheduled for September 18, will draw to a close on Monday.
Twenty-four assembly segments spread across Chenab valley districts of Doda, Kishtwar and Ramban and south Kashmir districts of Anantnag, Pulwama, Kulgam and Shopian are going to polls in the first of the three-phase elections on September 18.
Union Home Minister Amit Shah will address three rallies in Chenab valley on Monday, a BJP leader said. “The home minister will address three rallies at Ramban, Kishtwar and Padder on September 16,” BJP spokesperson and media centre in-charge Arun Kumar Gupta said.

Shah will first address a rally in Paddar Nagseni segment and will then proceed to Kishtwar and Ramban Assembly constituencies, where he will address one rally each.
Union Minister G Kishan Reddy said the prime minister will visit Jammu and Kashmir again ahead of the second phase of polling on September 25 and third phase on October 1 to address election rallies.
PM Modi to flag off first Vande Metro
Prime Minister Narendra Modi will flag off the country’s first ‘Vande Metro’ service between Bhuj and Ahmedabad besides several other Vande Bharat trains during his visit to Gujarat on Monday.
The prime minister’s other engagements include the inauguration of RE-INVEST 2024 in Gandhinagar and inaugurating and laying the foundation stone of multiple development projects worth more than Rs. 8,000 crore in Ahmedabad.

The Vande Bharat trains will operate on routes including Kolhapur-Pune, Pune-Hubballi, Nagpur-Secunderabad, Agra Cantt to Banaras, and Durg to Visakhapatnam. The first 20-coach Vande Bharat train will run between Varanasi and Delhi, as per a PMO release.
The prime minister will also inaugurate a 30 MW solar system, a 35 MW BESS Solar PV Project at Kutch Lignite Thermal Power Station, Kutch, and 220 Kilovolt substations at Morbi and Rajkot.
Modi will launch the Single Window IT System (SWITS) of the International Financial Services Centres Authority, designed to streamline financial services.
The PM will also sanction more than 30,000 houses under the PMAY-Gramin and release the first instalment for these homes, as well as launch construction of houses under the PMAY scheme.

Yogi to inaugurate temple in Tripura
Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and his Tripura counterpart Manik Saha will inaugurate a Siddheswari temple in West Tripura district on September 16, an official of Shanti Kali Ashram said on Saturday.
The newly built temple, situated in Barkathal, is among the 24 shrines managed by Shanti Kali Ashram in the northeastern state.
Tipra Motha supremo Pradyot Kishore Manikya Debbarma, who hails from the royal family, will be the guest of honour, the temple official said. “Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and Tripura Chief Minister Manik Saha will inaugurate Siddheswari temple in the presence of Pradyot Kishore Manikya Debbarma. Maharaj Chittaranjan Debbarma, head of Shanti Kali Ashram will also grace the occasion,” Sudip Debbarma, an associate of Shanti Kali Ashram told PTI on Saturday.
– With PTI inputs
==============================

Title:As Arvind Kejriwal punts on his political future, watch AAP play ‘ball by ball’
Date: 2024-09-16T09:29
Synopsys: By resigning as Delhi CM, the AAP chief has sounded the poll bugle in Delhi and tried to usher in a new narrative, making “Kejriwal”, his leadership, and all that he stands for the pivotal issues.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/as-arvind-kejriwal-punts-on-his-political-future-watch-aap-play-ball-by-ball-9569948/
Content: 
Some call him the master of the political spectacle, others envy his political reflexes that were again on display Sunday. In an unexpected move, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal announced that he would resign in “48 hours”, catching friends and foes off guard.
His gamble came within hours of being released on bail Friday from Tihar jail, but with court conditions continuing to circumscribe his functioning as CM. On Saturday, he went to the old Hanuman temple in Delhi’s Connaught Place and the cameras caught him with his wife Sunita and colleagues invoking the blessings of Lord Hanuman. The deity was invoked as an icon of the Aam Admi Party (AAP) in the past elections, too, with Kejriwal even reciting the Hanuman Chalisa.
On Sunday, in an impassioned speech at an AAP rally, he announced his resignation. “Let the people decide if I am imandaar (honest) or gunahgaar (guilty),” he thundered. It was an attempt to recapture the high moral ground when he said he would not continue as the CM till Delhi’s janata had decided on his “innocence” or “guilt” and each of those votes would be treated like like a “certificate”. Kejriwal will know that as the poorer sections of Delhi and its jhuggi jhopri (slum) dwellers remain loyal to the AAP, the party has lost some of its earlier sheen among the middle classes.

With his decision to resign, the AAP national convenor has taken a gamble and sounded the bugle for the Delhi Assembly elections. He has tried to usher in a new narrative, making “Kejriwal”, his leadership, and all that he stands for the pivotal issues. (There was a time during the 1971 elections when Indira Gandhi was questioned by a foreign correspondent about the issue in the election. ”I am the issue,” she unabashedly replied.)
Kejriwal appears to be banking on three factors to help him reshape the party agenda. One is the continuance of his delivery politics of bijlee (electricity), paani (water), schools, and hospitals for which his government is known and which the party has encashed in past elections. I recently visited the Mangolpuri area of North West Delhi to get a sense of the impact the just-released Manish Sisodia’s daily padyatras through the city were having.
“Why will we not vote for AAP when our children now learn at school, we can get medical aid, our bijlee-paani is taken care of? And also we can now travel free in the buses,” said a group of women who sold wares on the pavement. “It is wrong they are keeping Kejriwal in jail,” they added.
To retain this sympathy will be Kejriwal’s second objective and he will hope an electoral endorsement will “finish off” the case against him and Sisodia even as it goes on to its legal conclusion. The arrest of the AAP leaders had generated sympathy for the party in certain sections. But with the release of the AAP leaders, the sympathy for them will peter out as time goes by and elections are due five months away. Will Kejriwal’s resignation as CM now regenerate sympathy for him on a different count?

Thirdly, the AAP chief is pitching to regain his moral stature while underscoring his political savvy for which he has been known. Kejriwal knows only too well that every election needs a fresh narrative and he cannot rely on old themes alone.
Who will be his successor, even if it is for a few weeks? Will it be a woman, a Dalit, or his wife? It will only be for a short spell, till November if his request to hold the Delhi elections along with the Maharashtra polls is heeded, or for three months more if the polls are held on schedule in February?
A woman to head the Delhi government could make a difference to the women’s constituency that Kejriwal has been assiduously reaching out to. In his speech on Sunday, he chose to make public the information that he had sent a letter to the Lieutenant Governor from jail, requesting him to let Atishi unfurl the national flag on August 15 in his place but that the letter came back undelivered. Educated, experienced and with a clean image, Atishi, a minister in the Delhi government, could have an appeal for the old “Shiela Dixit constituency” the AAP may want to draw to its side. Though the name of Kejriwal’s wife Sunita is also doing the rounds, it will take away from the moral high ground he is seeking to occupy at this juncture.
Also Read | ‘PR stunt, drama’: BJP on Arvind Kejriwal’s decision to resign as Delhi CM
There are also other names being talked about: Gopal Rai and Saurabh Bhardwaj. The trouble is that, unlike most other parties, the AAP does not have caste or identity-based support to bank on.
Resignation as a weapon

Kejriwal is in line with all those politicians who have wielded “resignation” with great effect as a weapon to get out of difficult situations. Indian political history is replete with these stories: India’s seventh prime minister Vishwanath Pratap Singh resigned from the government of Rajiv Gandhi in 1987 and went on to replace him as PM in 1989. Dr Manmohan Singh threatened to resign as PM in mid-2008 to get his way in the party to push through with the Indo-US nuclear deal.
In the last 10 years, while the people of Delhi have opted for Narendra Modi’s BJP in successive Lok Sabha elections, they have favoured the AAP in the Assembly elections. Even as Kejriwal and the AAP get ready for battle against their main opponent BJP, this time there may be an elephant in the room. That is the Congress. In some ways, despite itself, the Congress is showing signs of being on the revival path because people want it to grow as a national counter to the BJP.
Also Read | Why Arvind Kejriwal is set to resign as Delhi CM: Behind AAP chief’s political calculations
Even though both parties are members of the INDIA alliance, the breakup of the Congress’s alliance with AAP in Haryana could have implications for Delhi and the AAP leadership knows this only too well and is getting ready to do battle alone.
Two days before Kejriwal’s release, when asked about the party’s course of action, Sisodia told this writer, “It will be ball by ball, and we have to decide how to play each ball.” The AAP story will now unfold ball by ball.

(Neerja Chowdhury, Contributing Editor, The Indian Express, has covered the last 11 Lok Sabha elections. She is the author of How Prime Ministers Decide)
==============================

Title:South Kashmir campaign set to end, PDP spots green shoots, Jamaat struggles to get off ground
Date: 2024-09-16T05:40
Synopsys: Since its alliance with BJP, Mufti’s party has been shrinking in its bastion, while NC has been growing.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/south-kashmir-campaign-pdp-spots-green-shoots-jamaat-struggles-9569585/
Content: 
IN A speech in Pulwama on Tuesday, Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) president Mehbooba Mufti credited the people of South Kashmir with “changing the destiny” of Jammu and Kashmir.
“By giving us 16 members, you showed the PDP the path to government,” Mufti said. “Your vote ended the suppression in J&K, your vote ended POTA in Kashmir, your vote disbanded the (Special) Task Force (of J-K Police)… Twenty two years ago, you changed the destiny of Kashmir.”
Mufti was referring to the 2002 Assembly elections, when the party came to power for the first time, in coalition with the Congress. The credit for the PDP’s rise to power, just three years after it was founded by Mufti Mohammad Sayeed in 1999, went clearly to South Kashmir, which gave the party 10 of its 16 seats, falling across the districts of Anantnag, Kulgam, Shopian and Pulwama.

In the subsequent Assembly elections of 2008, the PDP got 12 seats, followed by 11 in 2014.
However, 10 years – and an alliance with the BJP to form the government in 2014 – later, the PDP is struggling to retain its hold. South Kashmir’s 16 seats vote in the first phase on September 18, with the campaign wrapping up on Monday.
Even in the 2019 Lok Sabha polls, held months after the Pulwama attack that left 40 CRPF personnel dead, the disillusionment with the PDP was obvious. While Mufti took the lead in eight out of the 16 Assembly segments, the low voter turnout in traditional PDP areas resulted in her loss to NC first-timer Hasnain Masoodi, a retired High Court judge.
In the recent Lok Sabha polls, the PDP shrank further, with Mufti losing again – from the newly crafted Anantnag-Rajouri seat. Of the 18 Assembly segments that are part of the new seat, Mufti could secure a lead in only three this time, while the NC-Congress’s Mian Altaf (the winner) finished ahead in 15 segments.

Rival NC, which was almost wiped out in South Kashmir once, has now re-established itself, while the Jamaat-e-Islami’s presence in the electoral fray, even if limited, could hurt the PDP as it is targeting the same vote that the party used to command.
PDP’s hopes
The party is counting on the fact that the Assembly elections, happening after 10 years, are different, with both its voters and cadre energised at the renewal of political activity, especially after the Lok Sabha pollls. This will “show results in the Assembly elections,” says a PDP leader.
Popular PDP youth leader Waheed ur Rehman Para, the party’s driving force in South Kashmir, adds: “On the ground, there is no wave for any party. The NC may have some votes but that is for individual candidates and not the cadre. And many of their leaders are upset over not getting tickets.”
Para, who also lost in the Lok Sabha polls, from Srinagar, and is contesting the Assembly elections from Pulwama, adds: “Our strength is our cadre. Our leaders left us, but the cadre is intact.”

According to him, the PDP struggled in the Lok Sabha as it was not able to reach the people and its cadres because of “a government crackdown”. “Even on (Lok Sabha) election day, our workers were picked up to send a message to the people,” he claimed. “Despite that, people voted for us.”
Para says government pressure was also the reason the PDP saw a depletion of its ranks after the abrogation of Article 370 in 2019. Mufti, who was picked up in the mass arrests ahead of the Centre’s move, spent among the longest periods in detention of all leaders of mainstream parties.
In the time since, seven PDP MLAs from South Kashmir have left. Other senior leaders like Abdul Rehman Bhat and Mufti’s uncles Sartaj Madni and Farooq Andrabi have either taken a backseat or announced a break from active politics.
Now the PDP is banking on, what it calls, “pro-people” measures of its previous governments. Addressing a rally in Pulwama, Para raises a slogan, “Yeli yi Mufti (When Mufti will come to power)…”, and the crowd finishes it, “teli chali sakhti (then suppression will be erased)”.

In her speeches, the former CM continuously talks about her government’s decision to withdraw 12,000 FIRs registered against protesters and the disbanding of the police Task Force.
NC’s growth
With the PDP’s “soft separatism” appealing to South Kashmir where militancy has been the most active, the NC had been slowly pushed to the margins here, with the Congress emerging as the PDP’s main – if marginal – rival in the region. But the NC and Congress have never won more than two-three seats each in the region in the past few elections.
(This is not counting the seat of Kulgam, where CPI(M) leader M Y Tarigami has been holding on for four terms.)
In these elections, four of the eight seats that the Congress is contesting in the Valley as part of its alliance with the NC fall in South Kashmir.

An NC leader from South Kashmir refutes the claim that the party had been “wiped out” of the area, saying they are still the PDP’s main rival. “In electoral politics, if you leave space open, someone will fill it. The PDP allied with the BJP despite the fact that it sought votes against the BJP, and this left a window of opportunity open for us… It would be a tough fight between the two of us this time.”
Senior PDP leader Naeem Akhtar, however, argues that the space which became available in the absence of democratic competition in South Kashmir was taken over by militants and separatists, resulting in near total election boycott. In the 2019 parliamentary polls, there was only 8% polling.
“To that extent, it (the NC reviving in south Kashmir) is a welcome sign,” Akhtar says, who also says that “the PDP’s absence was forced”. “. But despite that we are reviving.”
This time, as the election campaign gathered pace, the PDP’s old cadre that had gone silent could be seen on the ground, with the youth in a majority and its election rallies gaining in size. Some leaders who had switched sides after 2019 have returned to the party, with many more seeking to do so.

Jamaat factor
The PDP’s rise in South Kashmir has long been credited to the fact that the Jamaat kept out of elections after denouncing the 1987 Assembly polls, when it contested under the banner of the Muslim United Front. Those elections are widely believed to have been rigged in favour of the NC-Congress alliance, and were the immediate spark for militancy.
This time, after expressing its desire to contest the elections and seeking unsuccessfully that the ban against it under the UAPA be lifted by the Centre, the Jamaat is backing 10 Independents. Four of them are standing in the South Kashmir seats of Pulwama, Zainapora, Kulgam and Devsar.
While the Jamaat has stirred the political scene in Kashmir, both PDP and NC leaders believe it won’t be a factor. “This leadership of the Jamaat (its eight-member panel that decided to contest the elections) isn’t acceptable even to Jamaat cadres,” says a senior NC South Kashmir leader. “The fact is that the original Jamaat cadre didn’t vote in the past and they will not vote even today.”
A former Jamaat leader rejects that its supporters rallied behind the PDP in its absence. “As an organisation, we never endorsed any party nor asked our cadres to vote against one… On the ground, some of our cadres or sympathisers might have voted for a party, but that was their own choice,” says the leader.

Meanwhile, apart from a big rally in Kulgam, the Jamaat campaign has failed to get going, with a large number of its own cadres clearly sceptical about the party’s move.
==============================

Title:5 takeaways from Arvind Kejriwal’s speech: Invoking British Raj to ‘advice’ for non-BJP CMs
Date: 2024-09-15T17:05
Synopsys: Delhi CM stops short of slamming Congress, says he did not resign after arrest as he respects democracy and Constitution is supreme for him
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/invoking-british-raj-non-bjp-cms-five-takeaways-kejriwal-9569306/
Content: 
Three days after he walked out of jail following the Supreme Court granting him bail in the alleged excise policy scam, Arvind Kejriwal announced on Sunday that he was going to resign as Chief Minister in the next two days and demanded Assembly polls to be held in November along with Maharashtra.
In an address to party workers at the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) headquarters, Kejriwal said he would sit on the CM’s chair again “only after people give him a certificate of honesty”.
Five takeaways from the AAP chief’s first address to party workers after his release:
‘Don’t resign… we can run govt from jail’

Kejriwal, who along with former Delhi Deputy CM Manish Sisodia and other AAP leaders was arrested in connection with the alleged liquor policy scam, said his party was the only one that could stand up to the BJP. “The BJP tried to prove him (Sisodia) corrupt. They cannot provide good schools and free electricity to people because they are corrupt. We are honest. They slap false cases against non-BJP Chief Ministers. If other CMs are arrested, I urge them not to resign but run the government from jail,” the Delhi CM said, making a reference to his counterparts Hemant Soren (Jharkhand), Siddaramaiah (Karnataka), Pinarayi Vijayan (Kerala), and Mamata Banerjee (West Bengal).
Kejriwal added that the Supreme Court also suggested in his case that he could run the government from jail, and that he did not resign (after being arrested) “because I respect democracy and the Constitution is supreme for me”.
Invokes AAP icon Bhagat Singh, British Raj
Kejriwal invoked the British Raj several times, including to slam Lieutenant Governor V K Saxena for not heeding to his request to let AAP leader and Delhi minister Atishi hoist the Tricolour on Independence Day in his absence.
“When Shaheed Bhagat Singh was in jail, he wrote letters to many people and the British sent these letters to the people outside. But when I went to jail, I wrote only one letter to the L-G, requesting him that on August 15, Atishi should be allowed to hoist the flag in my place. But that letter was not delivered to the L-G and a warning was issued that if you write a letter to the L-G, your meeting with your family will be stopped.”

Kejriwal also said that while freedom fighters were allowed meetings with colleagues, “my party colleague Sandeep Pathak was not allowed to meet me in jail” after one meeting where they discussed politics. “We are politicians… so we discussed politics.”
Also Read | Arvind Kejriwal bail: Six months later, why he walks out more a politician than a CM
‘People important, not BJP’
Close on the heels of his party’s war of words with the BJP over the Delhi government’s works in slums, Kejriwal, in a bid to stress that he was not “power hungry”, emphasised that he cared for the people and not the BJP.
“I will only sit in the CM’s chair after people give me a certificate of honesty. I want to give ‘agnipariksha’ after coming out of jail. I will become CM and Manish Sisodia Deputy CM only when people say we are honest. For me, the BJP is not important, people are important,” he said.

Referring to his 2014 resignation, the CM said he had quit for his ideals. “I do not have a lust for power,” he added.
‘No attack on Congress’
Interestingly, the Delhi CM stayed shy of attacking the Congress, with which his party recently had unsuccessful seat-sharing talks for the coming Haryana Assembly polls.
The AAP had fought the recent Lok Sabha polls as a part of the INDIA bloc and contested four of the seven seats in Delhi as a part of its alliance with the Congress, which contested three seats. However, the BJP won all seven seats. In Haryana, a section of the Congress is believed to have prevented any truck with the AAP.
‘I lived in slums’
Asking people of Delhi to come out in strength – “jam ke” – and vote, Kejriwal constantly invoked his government’s work in “setting up schools” and said he himself had lived in slums before he forayed into politics and knew how the poor lived.
==============================

Title:Why Arvind Kejriwal is set to resign as Delhi CM: Behind AAP chief’s political calculations
Date: 2024-09-16T05:39
Synopsys: AAP chief’s announcement catches some in BJP off guard; party still in “initial stages” of preparing for the Delhi elections, say BJP insiders.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/arvind-kejriwal-step-down-delhi-cm-9569146/
Content: 
Sending shockwaves through Delhi’s political circles, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal Sunday announced he would resign in two days. He added that his former deputy Manish Sisodia, who was released from jail a month ago, will not succeed him. Both would seek a mandate and prove their innocence in the Delhi excise policy case, said Kejriwal who got out of Tihar jail on Friday after nearly six months in prison in connection with the same case.
While there is no clarity yet on whether only the AAP convener will tender resignation, leaving a caretaker government in place for the time being, AAP sources said the move was in line with its apprehension of early elections in the city announced alongside the Maharashtra and Jharkhand Assembly elections that are slated to be held by December. As per the schedule, the elections in Delhi were set to be held in February 2025.
“The party is in favour of early polls in Delhi to be able to capitalise on the CM’s popularity, which has received another fillip after his release from jail just Friday,” said an AAP source.

Apart from Kejriwal and Sisodia, senior leader Vijay Nair, the party’s communications head, was recently released in the excise case. The CM’s long-time aide, Bibhav Kumar, who was arrested for allegedly assaulting AAP Rajya Sabha MP Swati Maliwal at Kejriwal’s home in May, was also granted bail recently, while senior Rajya Sabha MP Sanjay Singh, got bail in the excise case earlier this year. The release of these leaders has given the party a boost and it has been in election mode this past month.
Must Read | Arvind Kejriwal’s bail: From Supreme Court, a limited relief
The decision to resign was also a result of the two-fold curbs placed on Delhi’s elected government. One set of restrictions placed by the amended Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) Act, which gives more powers to the Lieutenant Governor, especially over the bureaucracy; and second, the bail conditions imposed on Kejriwal that say he cannot go to the Delhi secretariat and his office and can only sign those filed that are meant to be approved or cleared by the Lt Governor.
“It was important to resign after getting bail and not before as it would have been a sign of weakness. Now, the CM is out and can continue in his role but has chosen to do this of his own volition and not under external pressure. The workers have been on the ground but it is true that the repeated attacks on us have left us in a weaker position. The senior leaders will focus on dispelling the rumours that have been spread while they were away and reconnecting with voters,” said a senior AAP leader.
“It is also a principled stand. We believe the people of Delhi will see that neither the CM nor Sisodia is interested in the kursi (power). They are here to work for the people of Delhi,” the leader added.

BJP questions timing
The announcement caught some in the BJP off guard. The party has been aggressively seeking to bolster its attack on the AAP in general and its senior leadership, especially Kejriwal— over the issue of corruption. A BJP source said the party was still in the “initial stages” of preparing for the Delhi elections.
Delhi BJP secretary Harish Khurana questioned the timing of the announcement. “The question is why has he sought two days’ time to resign…it appears that this is an attempt to stage a new drama — that, look, I want to resign but the people don’t want me to,” he alleged.
“Now because there is a Supreme Court order that he cannot go to the (Delhi) secretariat or sign files and there is no basis for him to remain CM, and the people of Delhi and the country are asking tough questions of you that you have started this drama…the question is why not resign today, why this drama?” Khurana added.
Also Read | Arvind Kejriwal bail: Six months later, why he walks out more a politician than a CM
According to another BJP leader, the party has already chalked out a plan to hold the AAP accountable for civic issues “across the 250 municipal wards” in the capital. “The party held several deliberations over the campaign on at least two occasions — including one among the national and state leadership — in Vrindavan over the last few days. The BJP is more than ready to head into the Assembly polls if the need arises,” said the party functionary.

In the Delhi bureaucracy, there is some apprehension about the implementation of the Mukhya Mantri Mahila Samman Rashi Yojana — under which women will be eligible to receive Rs 1,000 monthly — over procedural issues and delay. A government official said, “Less than six months of the tenure of the current Delhi Assembly remains and the Election Commission of India is well within the boundary of rules to allow elections in Delhi along with Maharashtra.”
==============================

Title:Last time Arvind Kejriwal quit as Delhi CM: The 49-day govt and what followed
Date: 2024-09-15T15:10
Synopsys: During the subsequent year-long Central rule, Kejriwal apologised to the people for “leaving the government”. AAP stormed back to power in February 2015, winning 67 of the 70 seats.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/last-time-arvind-kejriwal-quit-as-delhi-cm-govt-and-what-followed-9569089/
Content: 
Days after walking out of jail and during his first visit to the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) headquarters since, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday said he would resign in the next two days and occupy the CM’s chair “only after people elect him again”.
“Despite the court giving us bail, the case will continue. I spoke to my lawyers. Till the case does not end, I will not sit on the CMs seat. After two days, I am going to resign from the post of CM. I will not sit on the CM’s seat till the people elect me and send me to the seat again,” the CM told party workers. If he resigns, it will not be the first time Kejriwal does so.
The Delhi Assembly elections of 2013, the results of which were announced on December 8 that year, threw up a hung verdict with the BJP emerging as the single-largest party winning 31 seats in the 70-member House. The AAP, which made its electoral debut, won 28 seats while the Congress was restricted to 8 and other parties won 3 seats.

The BJP, which was invited by then Lieutenant-Governor Najeeb Jung to form the government, declined the offer even as the three parties — Congress, BJP and AAP — ruled out alliances with each other. Jung then invited the AAP to form the government following which Kejriwal wrote to the BJP as well as the Congress seeking “clarity” on 18 issues. While the BJP declined support, the Congress reportedly agreed on 16 of the 18 issues and extended outside support to the AAP, paving the way for Kejriwal to be sworn in as Delhi CM on December 28, 2013.
Also Read | Kejriwal at Hanuman temple: ‘Lord’s blessings always with me in fight against injustice’
Some of his first moves as CM included initiation of a corruption redress “durbar” and the rollback of FDI in the multi-brand retail sector, a move sanctioned by the previous Sheila Dikshit-led Congress government, citing high unemployment.
Forty-nine days after assuming power, Kejriwal resigned as the CM on February 14, 2014, citing the non-introduction of the Jan Lokpal Bill in the Assembly following which President’s Rule was imposed in Delhi and the House was kept in suspended animation.
After stepping down as CM, Kejriwal unsuccessfully contested the 2014 Lok Sabha polls from Varanasi against then BJP prime ministerial candidate Narendra Modi and lost by a margin of 3.71 lakh votes. In the run-up to the elections, Kejriwal was a victim of two ink attacks even as eggs were hurled at his vehicle during campaigning in Varanasi.

In the run-up to the 2015 Assembly polls, Kejriwal repeatedly apologised to the people for stepping down, terming his 49-day tie-up with the Congress as an “honest mistake”.
“We realised that many people were quite angry with us for having quit the Delhi government. We were asked why we left the government. Earlier, we had decided to hold a referendum and ask people if we should try to form the government. But chances of government formation in the current Assembly are negligible. We will go to the people and hold various meetings with them in the coming days. We will apologise to them, gain their trust and seek their support so that we can come back with a thumping majority,” Kejriwal had said in May 2014.
Ahead of the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, Kejriwal met the autorickshaw driver who had slapped him during a roadshow while accusing the former Delhi CM of being a “liar”. The driver, Lali, was seen apologising to Kejriwal and said he had resorted to the act as he was “angry with Kejriwal for leaving the government in a few days”. He also faced attacks from the “supporters” of his mentor Anna Hazare while campaigning in Haryana in April 2014.
Just ahead of the Assembly polls in February 2015, he apologised again saying many people across Delhi felt that AAP’s actions have let them down. “In May (last year), we apologised to the people of Delhi for the disappointment caused; and in case you missed it the first time, I do so again – so you hear us loud and clear,” he had said.

The AAP stormed to power, winning 67 of the 70 seats, reducing the BJP to 3 seats. The Congress, which lost power nationally months earlier in the national elections, failed to open its account.
==============================

Title:What BJP fielding Muslim candidates in past Haryana polls tells us
Date: 2024-09-15T12:50
Synopsys: This time, the party has fielded two candidates from the minority community, both from the Muslim-dominated seats of Ferozepur Jhirka and Punahana in southern Haryana’s Mewat region.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/bjp-muslim-candidates-haryana-assembly-elections-2024-9568872/
Content: 
In the last five Haryana Assembly elections, the BJP fielded just seven Muslim candidates, none of whom won. However, these nominees did better than the Hindu candidates who had previously contested from these constituencies in the Muslim-dominated Mewat region in south Haryana, with the party’s vote share going up substantially, according to an analysis of past poll results.
This indicates that the BJP, despite its core ideology of Hindutva and perception as a party not aligned with minority interests, remains a choice for Muslim voters in Mewat. The party has a substantial voter base in the region that it successfully taps into when it fields Muslim candidates.
In the coming Assembly elections, two of the ruling BJP’s 90 candidates are from the Muslim community: Naseem Ahmed and Mohammad Aizaz Khan. While Ahmed will contest from Ferozepur Jhirka, where more than 80% of the voters are Muslim, Aizaz Khan is contesting from Punahana, where nearly 88% of the voters are Muslim. Both these Assembly constituencies are in the Muslim-dominated Nuh district in southern Haryana’s Mewat region.

ALSO READ | ‘BJP’s divisive politics a media creation’: Meet party’s Muslim candidates in Haryana Assembly polls
In Ferozepur Jhirka, the 2009 Assembly polls saw the BJP’s Hindu candidate win just 5.29% of the vote share. But in 2014, when the party fielded a Muslim leader from the state, it managed to increase its vote share to 12.09%. That year, Naseem Ahmed was the Indian National Lok Dal’s (INLD) candidate and he managed to win with a 29.47% vote share. In 2019, Ahmed was the BJP candidate from the state and though he managed to increase his vote share to 32.4%, he finished second behind the Congress’s Mamman Khan who had a 57.62% vote share.
In Punahana, though the BJP fielded a Muslim in the 2009 polls, the party got only 1.03% of the vote share. In the 2014 polls, another Muslim candidate increased the party’s vote share to 21.67%, finishing not far behind winner Rahish Khan who had a 29.56% vote share and INLD’s Mohammad Ilyas who got 26.85% of the votes. In 2019, when the BJP replaced him with Nauksham Chaudhary, a Hindu candidate, the party’s vote share fell to 17.65%, with the party again finishing third. Hoping for a reversal, the party has gone with a Muslim face this time.
In the Nuh Assembly seat, where 70% of the voters are Muslim, the BJP fielded a Muslim candidate in 1991 but only managed a 7.84% vote share and a fifth-place finish. In 2005, the next time it contested in Nuh, the party fielded another Muslim candidate but the vote share fell to 1.21%. In 2009, when it fielded Sanjay Singh, a Hindu, in this seat, the vote share jumped to 19.61% and it finished as the runner-up. In 2014, Singh again contested and bagged 19.75% of the votes but failed to win. In 2019, the party fielded a Muslim instead and managed to almost double its vote share to 38.55%, just behind the Congress at 41.77%. For the coming elections though, the party has again reposed its faith in Singh.
On why the BJP’s Muslim candidates were unable to win in the past, the party’s minority wing president in Haryana, Jaan Mohammad, said, “Earlier Muslims were associated with the Congress and Indian National Lok Dal. But now they are coming close to the BJP. They are receiving the benefits of the welfare schemes without any discrimination under BJP rule. They will vote for the BJP in the upcoming elections and the party will win these seats.”

The Congress claimed the BJP’s alleged anti-Muslim rhetoric hurt its electoral prospects. Iqbal Jaildar, a former president of the Haryana BJP minority wing who is now in the Congress, said, “Communal hatred increased after the BJP came to the power at the Centre and in the state in 2014. The BJP’s minority candidates could not win because of certain remarks of BJP leaders. Hatred was not to that extent before 2014.” Jaildar resigned from the BJP in 2018 after the death of Muslim youth in a police shootout. He had contested the 2014 Assembly polls from Punahana on a BJP ticket.
Jaan Mohammad, however, downplayed the alleged communal remarks of BJP leaders, saying, “The public understands that these remarks are for election time only.”
BJP’s Nuh district president Narender Patel claimed Muslims were now drawing closer to the BJP. “The distance of Muslims with the BJP has decreased over the years. They have started attending the BJP’s rallies and other programmes. A lot of development has been done (in Nuh) in the past 10 years. People have got welfare scheme benefits. Nearly 8,000 people have got government jobs in the Nuh district alone. We are hopeful of winning some seats this time,” he said.
==============================

Title:Why Congress lets Hooda call the shots in Haryana: From picking candidates to scuttling AAP alliance
Date: 2024-09-15T11:15
Synopsys: Jat stalwart Bhupinder Hooda, who turns 77 Sunday, remains Haryana Cong's face despite being accused of reducing it to a “Bapu-Beta party”, even as he has managed to keep most of its state leaders on his side
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/why-cong-lets-hooda-call-the-shots-in-haryana-from-picking-candidates-to-scuttling-aap-alliance-9568104/
Content: 
The Haryana Congress veteran and Leader of the Opposition, Bhupinder Singh Hooda, two-time chief minister and four-time MP, continues to be the Congress’s face in the state, even as it has not projected any CM candidate for the October 5 Assembly polls in keeping with the “party’s convention”.
The political heavyweight belonging to the Jat community, Hooda, who turns 77 on Sunday, has been having his way in the Congress for many years, regardless of the opposition that he faces from his detractors within the party.
In the recent Lok Sabha polls, Hooda managed to get eight candidates of his choice out of the state’s 10 seats – including his son Deepender Hooda (Rohtak), Varun Chaudhry (Ambala), Jai Prakash (Hisar), Satpal Brahmchari (Sonipat), Rao Dan Singh (Bhiwani-Mahendragarh), Mahendra Pratap Singh (Faridabad), Raj Babbar (Gurgaon) and Divyanshu Buddhiraja (Karnal) – with his bete noire Kumari Selja contesting the Sirsa seat. The Congress left one seat, Kurukshetra, for its INDIA ally AAP.

In the polls, the Congress and the BJP won five seats each. Of the winning Congress candidates, four were Hooda’s picks including Deepender, Satpal, Varun and Jai Prakash, with the fifth one being Selja.
Hooda faced criticism from a Congress section for “wrong candidate selection”, but the point remained that the party increased its vote share by 15% as compared to the 2019 Lok Sabha polls.
This time, as regards the selection of candidates for the 90 Assembly seats, Congress sources told The Indian Express that “Hooda has got a majority of candidates of his choice. At least 70 candidates are such who are backed by Hooda or his son Deepender”. During several meetings held by the Congress high command in this regard, Selja and another Hooda detractor Randeep Singh Surjewala also gave the lists of their recommended candidates, but the party leadership chose to accept Hooda’s nominees for most of the seats.
The proposed alliance between the Congress and the AAP did not materialise mainly due to Hooda’s stiff opposition, even though other senior party leaders including Selja, Birender Singh and Capt Ajay Singh Yadav were also against it.

“It was Hooda, who had put his foot down and vociferously opposed any alliance with the AAP. Despite the pulls and pressures and even Rahul Gandhi’s inclination to have some kind of seat-sharing arrangement with allies including AAP or Samajwadi Party, Hooda did not budge and the alliance did not happen,” a senior party leader told The Indian Express.
Hooda’s clout has continued to rise since 2005, when he was known for his proximity to then party president Sonia Gandhi.
After getting the better of then Haryana Congress old guard led by Bhajan Lal and fitting in the party’s long-term plan to overshadow the other prominent Jat leader, INLD chief Om Prakash Chautala, Hooda took charge as the CM after the party’s resounding win in the 2005 polls. Bhajan Lal sulked, but soon relented after several leaders from his camp deserted him to side with Hooda whose rise put an end to the dominance of “the politics of Lals (Devi Lal, Bansi Lal, Bhajan Lal)” in Haryana.
Hooda established himself as the Congress’s Jat face and completed his full term despite facing dissension from the Bhajan Lal camp. He emerged as the party’s CM face in the 2009 polls. The Congress got 40 seats, falling short of the majority mark by six seats. Party insiders say it was Hooda’s political acumen and skills that he brought seven Independents, including Gopal Kanda, on board to form the government again. It was the first time since 1972 that Haryana saw the incumbent party returning to power.

“The BJP’s campaign against the Congress and Hooda over the Robert Vadra-DLF land deal issue led to the party’s rout in 2014 (it slipped to 15 seats, behind INLDs’ 19) and the BJP’s victory, but Hooda’s proximity to the party high command was not affected,”, another Congress leader said.
The BJP’s campaign in Haryana in every election over the last several years has been centred on its opposition to Hooda. Even within the Congress, his detractors have gone after him for promoting his son Deepender at the cost of the party’s interests, accusing him of “reducing Congress to a Bapu-Beta party”, but Hooda has managed to keep most of state party leaders on his side.
Also Read | Haryana Assembly Elections 2024: List of key fights shaping Haryana’s assembly polls
“Hooda was part of the Congress’s G-23 dissident group against the party high command, yet he sailed through unscathed. He enjoys good relations with Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union Home Minister Amit Shah. The manner in which all his detractors, Ashok Tanwar, Kuldeep Bishnoi, Kiran Choudhry etc had been sidelined over the last 15 years has made him even stronger in the party,” another senior state Congress leader said.
“Ahead of 2019 Assembly polls, while addressing a rally in Gohana, Hooda had openly declared himself as the CM face, with or without Congress, but no action was taken against him. Despite a strong Modi wave, Congress led by Hooda bagged 31 seats against BJP’s 40. Had Hooda got his way in 2019 candidate selection, the results would have been different and BJP might have not returned to power then.”

Also Read | Why Haryana is crucial for BJP to win
Haryana has nearly 27% Jat voters, who play a key role in determining the outcome in about 40 seats. With Chautalas remaining divided, Hooda is widely acknowledged as the “tallest Jat leader” in the state. “The party high command cannot afford to upset Hooda, especially when most of the candidates are of his choice. If most of them win and the party secures a majority, it would be difficult for the high command to ignore Hooda’s claim for the CM post,” said another party leader.
Admitting that “what happens in future cannot be predicted”, he however also said, “Selja is another strong contender for the CM’s post. She is a woman leader from the Dalit community. She is close to the party high command and has registered a thumping victory from Sirsa. But, as the party affairs in-charge Deepak Babaria had been saying it is the high command and the choice of elected MLAs that will finally decide the CM face in the event of the party’s victory in the polls.”
==============================

Title:As PM kicks off rallies today, why Haryana is crucial for BJP to win
Date: 2024-09-16T01:38
Synopsys: Given its strategic location where farmer protests have been strongest, and as buffer between Delhi and Punjab, Haryana matters in ways more than one.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/pm-modi-haryana-rallies-bjp-assembly-elections-9567166/
Content: 
As Prime Minister Narendra Modi starts his poll rallies for the Jammu and Kashmir, Haryana Assembly elections, the BJP is hoping it will help shrug off the impression that the party’s campaign is struggling, with rebellions and resignations marking the release of candidate lists in both.
While even a decent number in J&K would be a boost for the BJP, given these are the first elections after its game-changing Article 370 abrogation, senior party leaders fear that a loss in Haryana would have far-reaching implications. Apart from adding to the Opposition momentum coming so soon after the Lok Sabha results, it will mean the loss of a crucial state in terms of both resources and the larger message to the farming community.
Admitting that “the stakes are really high”, a senior party leader pointed out that with Haryana under its control, the BJP could fend off some of the heat from the farmer protests. A loss in Haryana would mean another state going to the Opposition after Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Delhi where the protests have got the most traction, with the BJP suffering a setback in another such state – Uttar Pradesh – recently in the Lok Sabha polls.

“The protesters from Punjab and Haryana could be stopped at the borders before entering the national capital. At the peak of the farmer agitation, Haryana, having a BJP government, could stop it from becoming a national protest. The consequence of losing Haryana means these types of Opposition-mobilised protests and agitations can arrive at Delhi without any checks,” the leader said.
Another aspect of losing Haryana is Gurgaon, which along with Noida in UP is the fastest-developing region for investments and real estate in North India. The other two such hubs, Hyderabad and Bengaluru, are already in Congress-ruled states.
“If Gurugram also goes to the Opposition, it essentially means that almost all the fast-growing metros will be with the Opposition,” said the leader.
Check out | Why Rao Inderjit Singh is almost indispensable to BJP in Haryana
More than hurting the BJP’s kitty, it may mean a substantial addition to the Congress’s, with the Opposition party hamstrung by a severe lack of resources since it lost power one by one across states and the Centre.

What also makes Haryana crucial is that next up is Maharashtra, hosting the commercial capital Mumbai, where the BJP is also facing a tough fight from the Opposition.
Some leaders in the party are raising questions over how the candidate lists were handled, particularly given that this was identified as a prime factor in the setback to the BJP in crucial UP in the Lok Sabha polls.
The BJP’s core team for Haryana includes Union minister Dharmendra Pradhan, election in-charge Biplab Kumar Deb and co-in charge Satish Poonia. While Deb, former Haryana CM Manohar Lal Khattar, CM Nayab Singh Saini, state BJP chief Mohan Lal Badoli and Haryana organisation in-charge Faninder Nath Sharma played a crucial role in candidate selection apart from deciding poll strategy, a source in Haryana noted that the final call was taken by Union Home Minister Amit Shah and BJP national president J P Nadda.
Also read | Haryana Assembly Elections 2024: List of key fights shaping Haryana’s assembly polls
However, sources added, the rebellions did not mean that the candidate selection was flawed. “Unprecedented caution” had been shown in the exercise, a leader said, including accommodating the interests of all significant leaders and addressing their concerns.

No popular or mass leader had been “ignored”, sources pointed out, giving the example of, among others, senior leader and Lok Sabha MP Krishan Pal Gujjar. If he could not get a ticket for his son, at least five of his supporters figure in the list, a source said. Similarly, Union minister of state Rao Inderjit Singh, who has been making noises about wanting to be CM, has got a ticket for his daughter Aarti Singh Rao from Ateli, apart from nine supporters in other seats.
A leader said that almost a dozen candidates carry Khattar’s stamp, five are in on Saini’s recommendations, Bhiwani-Mahendragarh MP Dharambir Singh has got two of his supporters inducted, while ex-MP Sunita Duggal will now fight on the party’s behalf from Ratia.
==============================

Title:Congress gets chairs for 3 committees in Lok Sabha, 1 in Rajya Sabha
Date: 2024-09-16T11:35
Synopsys: Highly placed sources told The Indian Express that in the Lok Sabha, the Congress will get chairs for the External Affairs Standing Committee, Standing Committee on Agriculture and the Standing Committee on Rural Development.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/parliament-standing-committees-congress-chairs-lok-sabha-rajya-sabha-9570312/
Content: 
The negotiations for the Parliamentary Standing Committees between the government and the Opposition are over, with the Congress having managed to get chairs for three committees in the Lok Sabha and one in the Rajya Sabha.
Highly placed sources told The Indian Express that in the Lok Sabha, the Congress will get chairs for the External Affairs Standing Committee, Standing Committee on Agriculture and the Standing Committee on Rural Development. In the Rajya Sabha, the Opposition party will get the Standing Committee for Education.
Negotiations between the government and the Opposition parties had been ongoing over the committees for a couple of months.

The Congress had sought chairs for five Parliamentary Standing Committees — four of Lok Sabha and one of Rajya Sabha. One chair each is also likely to be granted to INDIA partners the Samajwadi Party, DMK, and AITC. For the one chair in the Rajya Sabha committees, the Congress had sought the crucial Committee on Home Affairs.
Several rounds of meetings between the government representatives and Opposition members took place before the government decided to allocate the standing committee chairs to the Opposition. The meetings were attended by Parliamentary Affairs Minister Kiren Rijiju, and Union Minister of State for Law and Justice and Parliamentary Affairs Arjun Ram Meghwal. The Congress was represented by Deputy Leader in the Lok Sabha Gaurav Gogoi, and chief whips of the parties Kodikunnil Suresh and Hairam Ramesh.
On August 16, five standing committees of Parliament were constituted, with Congress MP and general secretary in charge (organisation) K C Venugopal being named as the chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts. The post of chair of the Committee on Public Accounts as per convention is given to the Opposition.
Also Read | India’s Parliamentary Committee System: Unveiling its origin, significance and challenges
The other committees constituted were the Committee on Welfare of Other Backward Classes, which will be headed by Ganesh Singh (BJP), Committee of Estimates, which will be headed by Sanjay Jaiswal (BJP), Committee on Public Undertakings, which will be headed by Baijayant Panda (BJP), and the Committee on Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, which will be headed by Faggan Singh Kulaste (BJP).

On August 27, All India Trinamool Congress MP Derek O’Brien had written to Leader of the House in Rajya Sabha J P Nadda over the delay in the re-constitution of department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees (DPSCs). In his letter, O’Brien said that the delay in the constitution of the committees has profound implications for the democratic process and the quality of legislation enacted.
In the last Lok Sabha term, when the Congress had 53 members, the party had the chairmanship of just one committee. This time, the Congress has 99 members in the Lok Sabha while other Opposition parties like the Samajwadi Party (37), TMC (29), and DMK (22) have considerable numbers in the Lok Sabha. These parties are also expected to get some representation in the House committees.
==============================
Title:Swanky cars to jewellery worth crores, what Haryana’s political dynasts have declared in poll affidavits
Date: 2024-09-16T07:38
Synopsys: While Dushyant Chautala owns a Toyota Fortuner, his brother Digvijay owns a Range Rover, BJP’s Shruti Choudhary owns a BMW X1 and Mini Cooper along with her spouse
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/what-haryana-political-dynasts-have-declared-in-poll-affidavits-9569977/
Content: 
Several of the political dynasts contesting the October 5 Haryana Assembly elections own swanky cars and gold and silver worth crores, their election affidavits show.
The richest among these dynasts is former Deputy Chief Minister and Jannayak Janta Party (JJP) chief Dushyant Chautala, who is contesting from Uchana Kalan. He has declared assets worth Rs 122.48 crore – Rs 44.03 crore movable and Rs 78.54 crore immovable – with sources of income listed in his poll affidavit as “agriculture, salary and business”. While Dushyant owns a Toyota Fortuner, he and his wife collectively own 5.6 kg of gold worth Rs 4.14 crore and diamonds worth Rs 2.63 crore.
The JJP chief’s brother Digvijay and the party’s candidate from Dabwali, along with his spouse, has declared assets worth Rs 102.17 crore. While he owns a Range Rover, the couple owns 4.6 kg of gold worth Rs 3.4 crore and diamonds worth Rs 1.96 crore. Digvijay, like his brother, has also listed “agriculture, salary and business” as his sources of income.

Arjun, Dushyant and Digvijay’s cousin and the son of Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) leader Abhay Chautala, is the party nominee from the Rania seat. He has declared assets worth Rs 45.98 crore while listing “agriculture and business” as his sources of income. He owns a Hummer and with his wife, collectively owns 2.8 kg of gold worth Rs 2 crore and diamonds worth Rs 3.9 crore.
BJP’s Tosham candidate and former CM Bansi Lal’s granddaughter Shruti Choudhary, who recently crossed over from the Congress along with her mother Kiran, owns a BMW X1 and Mini Cooper along with her spouse. Together, the couple also owns 10.95 kg of gold, diamonds, and precious stones, besides 75 kg of silver, all worth Rs 10.09 crore. She has declared assets worth Rs 104.32 crore, of which Rs 44.11 crore are movable.
Union Minister Rao Inderjit Singh’s daughter Aarti has declared assets worth Rs 68.26 crore. The BJP’s Ateli candidate, Aarti has 1.9 kg of gold worth Rs 1.29 crore besides diamond jewellery worth Rs 10.69 lakh.
Aditya Surjewala, the son of Congress’ Rajya Sabha MP Randeep Singh Surjewala and party candidate from the family stronghold of Kaithal, has declared assets worth Rs 20.09 crore and owns gold and jewellery worth Rs 91.25 lakh along with his wife.

With “business” as his source of income and total assets worth Rs 6.96 crore, grandson of former CM Bhajan Lal, Bhavya Bishnoi does not own any vehicle but collectively with his wife, the BJP’s Adampur candidate owns 1.4 kg of gold worth Rs 1.05 crore.
Chander Mohan, the Congress’ Panchkula candidate and Bhajan Lal’s son, has declared assets worth Rs 80.47 crore and is the owner of a Mercedes Benz car. With sources of income as “social work, bank interest and pension”, the four-time MLA collectively owns 1.1 kg gold worth Rs 85 lakh with his wife.
Former Union Minister Birender Singh jumped ship from the BJP to the Congress along with his son Brijendra ahead of the Lok Sabha polls. Brijendra, a former MP from Hisar, is taking on Dushyant in Uchana Kalan. He and his wife have declared assets worth Rs 26.73 crore including a Toyota Fortuner Legender and an Innova Hycross, among other vehicles. The couple also owns gold and diamonds worth Rs 18.75 lakh and Congress’ Uchana Kalan candidate has listed his sources of income as “salary, rent, interest and capital gain”.
INLD nominee from Dabwali and former Deputy PM Devi Lal’s grandson Aditya Sihag has declared assets worth Rs 26.4 crore including gold and diamonds worth Rs 1.18 crore. Anirudh Chaudhary, a former treasurer of the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) and Bansi Lal’s grandson has assets worth Rs 21.33 crore including a Toyota Fortuner and Toyota Innova Hycross besides gold and diamond jewellery worth Rs 55.57 lakh. The Congress’s Tosham nominee has listed business, consultancy and directorship in companies as his source of income.

Abhay Singh Chautala, Devi Lal’s grandson and INLD’s Ellenabad candidate, who has declared assets worth Rs 61.01 crore, owns seven vehicles including two Toyota Land Cruisers, 2.9 kg gold worth Rs 2.07 crore and diamonds worth Rs 45 lakh. He has listed “agriculture and business” as his sources of income.
Former BJP minister-turned-rebel Ranjit Singh Chautala, who is contesting as an Independent from Rania, has declared total assets worth Rs 23.98 crore. Apart from the Ford Endeavor and Toyota Fortuner, Devi Lal’s son owns gold and diamonds worth Rs 61 lakh, four buffaloes and three cows. He has listed his source of income as “agriculture, salary and pension”.
==============================
Title:Arvind Kejriwal’s decision draws Delhi Congress flak: ‘Nautanki … do not want AAP to expand too much’
Date: 2024-09-16T07:38
Synopsys: “There is still a feeling in the Congress that Kejriwal is not to be trusted and hence, the party is cautious about him and AAP," says a Congress leader
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/arvind-kejriwal-decision-delhi-congress-flak-aap-9569952/
Content: 
While most INDIA bloc allies maintained that Arvind Kejriwal’s announcement of resignation was a decision of the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), the Delhi Chief Minister’s move brought to the fore the fissures between the Congress and the AAP. Kejriwal’s announcement came just days after talks over seat sharing between the two parties in Haryana didn’t work out, with the Congress sources saying that the AAP was “demanding too many seats”.
On Sunday, a section of Delhi Congress leaders termed Kejriwal’s announcement “nautanki (drama)”. “He is doing drama. He has no moral ground anymore. If he had any morality, he would have resigned earlier,” said Delhi Congress leader and former MP Sandeep Dikshit. Asked about the two Opposition parties being allies nationally, Dikshit said: “That is at the national level. But in Delhi, our fight is against Arvind Kejriwal.”
Echoing similar views, a senior Congress leader said the party does not want the AAP to expand too much. “They knew that an alliance in Haryana would have benefitted them. Hence, they wanted an alliance with us. But it didn’t work out. Now, for Delhi elections – whenever it happens – it will be difficult for the two parties to come together,” said the leader.

According to another party leader, Congress leader Bhupinder Singh Hooda opposed the alliance in Haryana. “While the central leadership may have some sympathy or may feel positively about the AAP, the state units are not inclined to ally with the party. The same thing happened in Haryana.”
“There is still a feeling in the Congress that Kejriwal is not to be trusted and hence, the party is cautious about him and AAP. He has announced that he will resign, but what is the motive? What impact will it have? We don’t know. Hence, we are waiting to see things pan out over the next few days,” said a senior Congress leader Sunday.
Notably, while several INDIA bloc parties welcomed Kejriwal’s bail on Friday, the Congress top leadership, including the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha Rahul Gandhi and party chief Mallikarjun Kharge, had maintained a strategic silence over the Supreme Court verdict. When asked about the court order, Congress spokesperson Supriya Shrinate had refused to “comment on it per se”. Instead, she highlighted how the “(central investigative) agencies have been misused against rivals in the past 10 years”.
The differences between the Congress and AAP notwithstanding, several other INDIA bloc parties reiterated that “central agencies were being misused by the government to target the Opposition”.

Trinamool Congress’s (TMC) Sagarika Ghose said the BJP, unable to handle electoral defeats, has tried every trick in the book to try and undermine and dislodge the AAP CM. “Kejriwal has consistently challenged and defeated the BJP in Delhi for the last decade. The BJP and the unelected Delhi LG have been interfering daily in the AAP government’s functioning and preventing an elected government from working,” she said.
Terming the resignation a “courageous step”, she said, “The BJP is repeatedly misusing central agencies like CBI and ED in a most disgraceful and unconstitutional manner to attack every opposition leader. Kejriwal has called the BJP’s bluff and shown that he remains one step ahead of the BJP”.
CPI’s D Raja shared similar views on the misuse of central agencies. However, he said the resignation is Kejriwal’s prerogative. “He will have to explain to the people why he is doing so because he is an elected person. That is between him, his party and the people.
They have not consulted INDIA bloc parties. It is their (AAP’s) independent decision. It is for the party to explain to the people what is their future course of action,” Raja said.

Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) MP Manoj Jha said there was a need to pay attention to what the court said while granting bail. “Apart from his statement (on resignation), there is a need to pay attention to that too. When Hemant Soren ji was released, what did the Supreme Court say? We need to pay attention to that. What did the court say when Arvind Kejriwal was granted bail? It is important to note what the court. It is important to see that through these institutions, the political game is being played by the BJP. I feel there will be a full stop to it. There will be an end to political vendetta started by two people in the last 10 years,” he said.
==============================
Title:One nation, one election in this term; coalition won’t stall any reforms: Govt
Date: 2024-09-16T10:10
Synopsys: Preparations started for conducting the Census, but a decision is yet to be taken on including a column on caste, says top government functionary.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/one-nation-one-election-nda-bjp-coalition-reforms-govt-9569936/
Content: 
Despite the BJP being in a minority, the NDA government will implement “one nation, one election,” in its current tenure, a top government functionary said Sunday. This, even as he insisted that “there should be no confusion about the sthayi niti (policy stability) under a government elected for a third successive term after 60 years.”
The functionary said that there is no area where the NDA government, which completed 100 days of its third term Sunday, has not taken policy decisions to continue the work it had initiated 10 years ago: “Whether it is defence, space, external and home affairs, education, Digital India and making India a manufacturing hub, spending Rs 11 lakh crore annually on building infrastructure, mahila-yuva-garib-kisan (welfare of women, youth, poor and farmers), we are continuing with and taking forward the work that was started in 2014. Even our foreign policy has a reedh ki haddi (backbone) today, which it didn’t have under previous governments”.
Since he brought in the BJP to power with a majority in 2014, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been advocating for “One Nation, One Election” — holding elections to Lok Sabha, all state Legislative Assemblies, and urban and rural local bodies (municipalities and panchayats) at the same time.

In his latest Independence Day address, too, he made a strong pitch for it, contending that frequent polls were creating hurdles in the country’s progress. A high-level committee, headed by former president Ram Nath Kovind, in March this year recommended simultaneous elections for the Lok Sabha and state assemblies as the first step followed by synchronised local body polls within 100 days.
Also read | One Nation, One Election: Highlights of the Kovind panel’s recommendations
This requires a Constitutional amendment but, as a first step, to hold the Lok Sabha and state elections together, a ratification by states will not be required for the amendment, once it is approved by Parliament. In the second step, elections to municipalities and the panchayats will be synchronised with elections to Lok Sabha and Assemblies in such a way that local body elections are held within 100 days of the elections to Lok Sabha and Assemblies. This will require ratification by not less than one-half of the states.
The source said the Government had started preparations for conducting the Census, but a decision is yet to be taken on including a column on caste. “The process will begin soon” he said. The decadal census was not conducted in 2020 due to Covid-19 Pandemic.
Check out | As caste census demand rises, why there is need for a relook at the 1931 exercise
The BJP, which won 240 seats, relies on its allies including TDP, Janata Dal-United and Lok Janshakti Party (Ram Vilas) for its majority. Questions have been raised about their support to the one nation, one election plan but BJP leaders said that all these allies are on board and “arithmetic” would not get in the way of this “reform process.”

In August, the Centre was forced to withdraw an advertisement for filling up 45 key posts in the government through lateral entry within a day of “concerns” expressed by two of its allies, the JD(U) and LJP (Ram Vilas). Earlier, with some allies, including the JD(U), LJP and TDP, wary about the widespread changes proposed in the Waqf (Amendment) Bill, the government sent the legislation to a Joint Committee of Parliament.
Now, with the ruling party fighting election in Jammu and Kashmir, the functionary also said the BJP will consider possibilities of forming the government with Independents and smaller parties. “One thing is sure – neither the PDP, the National Conference nor the Congress will not be able to form the government there. There are 33 smaller parties contesting elections there,” he said.
As a marker, sources in the government said, projects worth at least Rs 15 lakh crore have been cleared in the first 100 days in the third term of this NDA government. Of these, projects worth Rs 3 lakh crore have been green-lit with focus on roads, railways, ports, and airways.
Arguing that the idea of employment being linked to only government jobs should be “corrected,” the top government functionary said that increasing capital expenditure to Rs 11.11 lakh crore in the infrastructure sector will lead to job creation. “The disillusionment and frustration (nirasha and hatasha) among youth over jobs is not just unfair to the government that has been taking several such steps, it’s an injustice to the youth also,” the functionary said.

In the health sector, under the Ayushman Bharat scheme, the government has extended the Rs 5 lakh per year coverage to every citizen over 70 years, and this is expected to benefit 6 crore senior citizens. The government has also increased 70,000 medical seats which “should ensure that no student would have to go abroad for medical studies,” the functionary said.
==============================
Title:Today in Politics: PM Modi to flag off country’s first Vande Metro; Amit Shah to address 3 rallies on last day of phase 1 J&K campaign
Date: 2024-09-16T08:07
Synopsys: PM to also flag off Vande Bharat trains on different routes as well as lay foundation stones for development projects worth Rs 8,000 crore in Ahmedabad
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/today-in-politics-pm-modi-vande-bharat-metro-amit-shah-tripura-9569939/
Content: 
Campaigning for the first phase of the Assembly polls for the first phase in Jammu and Kashmir, scheduled for September 18, will draw to a close on Monday.
Twenty-four assembly segments spread across Chenab valley districts of Doda, Kishtwar and Ramban and south Kashmir districts of Anantnag, Pulwama, Kulgam and Shopian are going to polls in the first of the three-phase elections on September 18.
Union Home Minister Amit Shah will address three rallies in Chenab valley on Monday, a BJP leader said. “The home minister will address three rallies at Ramban, Kishtwar and Padder on September 16,” BJP spokesperson and media centre in-charge Arun Kumar Gupta said.

Shah will first address a rally in Paddar Nagseni segment and will then proceed to Kishtwar and Ramban Assembly constituencies, where he will address one rally each.
Union Minister G Kishan Reddy said the prime minister will visit Jammu and Kashmir again ahead of the second phase of polling on September 25 and third phase on October 1 to address election rallies.
PM Modi to flag off first Vande Metro
Prime Minister Narendra Modi will flag off the country’s first ‘Vande Metro’ service between Bhuj and Ahmedabad besides several other Vande Bharat trains during his visit to Gujarat on Monday.
The prime minister’s other engagements include the inauguration of RE-INVEST 2024 in Gandhinagar and inaugurating and laying the foundation stone of multiple development projects worth more than Rs. 8,000 crore in Ahmedabad.

The Vande Bharat trains will operate on routes including Kolhapur-Pune, Pune-Hubballi, Nagpur-Secunderabad, Agra Cantt to Banaras, and Durg to Visakhapatnam. The first 20-coach Vande Bharat train will run between Varanasi and Delhi, as per a PMO release.
The prime minister will also inaugurate a 30 MW solar system, a 35 MW BESS Solar PV Project at Kutch Lignite Thermal Power Station, Kutch, and 220 Kilovolt substations at Morbi and Rajkot.
Modi will launch the Single Window IT System (SWITS) of the International Financial Services Centres Authority, designed to streamline financial services.
The PM will also sanction more than 30,000 houses under the PMAY-Gramin and release the first instalment for these homes, as well as launch construction of houses under the PMAY scheme.

Yogi to inaugurate temple in Tripura
Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and his Tripura counterpart Manik Saha will inaugurate a Siddheswari temple in West Tripura district on September 16, an official of Shanti Kali Ashram said on Saturday.
The newly built temple, situated in Barkathal, is among the 24 shrines managed by Shanti Kali Ashram in the northeastern state.
Tipra Motha supremo Pradyot Kishore Manikya Debbarma, who hails from the royal family, will be the guest of honour, the temple official said. “Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and Tripura Chief Minister Manik Saha will inaugurate Siddheswari temple in the presence of Pradyot Kishore Manikya Debbarma. Maharaj Chittaranjan Debbarma, head of Shanti Kali Ashram will also grace the occasion,” Sudip Debbarma, an associate of Shanti Kali Ashram told PTI on Saturday.
– With PTI inputs
==============================
Title:As Arvind Kejriwal punts on his political future, watch AAP play ‘ball by ball’
Date: 2024-09-16T11:53
Synopsys: By offering to resign as Delhi CM, the AAP chief has sounded the poll bugle in Delhi and tried to usher in a new narrative, making “Kejriwal”, his leadership, and all that he stands for the pivotal issues.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/as-arvind-kejriwal-punts-on-his-political-future-watch-aap-play-ball-by-ball-9569948/
Content: 
Some call him the master of the political spectacle, others envy his political reflexes that were again on display Sunday. In an unexpected move, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal announced that he would resign in “48 hours”, catching friends and foes off guard.
His gamble came within hours of being released on bail Friday from Tihar jail, but with court conditions continuing to circumscribe his functioning as CM. On Saturday, he went to the old Hanuman temple in Delhi’s Connaught Place and the cameras caught him with his wife Sunita and colleagues invoking the blessings of Lord Hanuman. The deity was invoked as an icon of the Aam Admi Party (AAP) in the past elections, too, with Kejriwal even reciting the Hanuman Chalisa.
On Sunday, in an impassioned speech at an AAP rally, he announced his resignation. “Let the people decide if I am imandaar (honest) or gunahgaar (guilty),” he thundered. It was an attempt to recapture the high moral ground when he said he would not continue as the CM till Delhi’s janata had decided on his “innocence” or “guilt” and each of those votes would be treated like like a “certificate”. Kejriwal will know that as the poorer sections of Delhi and its jhuggi jhopri (slum) dwellers remain loyal to the AAP, the party has lost some of its earlier sheen among the middle classes.

With his decision to resign, the AAP national convenor has taken a gamble and sounded the bugle for the Delhi Assembly elections. He has tried to usher in a new narrative, making “Kejriwal”, his leadership, and all that he stands for the pivotal issues. (There was a time during the 1971 elections when Indira Gandhi was questioned by a foreign correspondent about the issue in the election. ”I am the issue,” she unabashedly replied.)
Kejriwal appears to be banking on three factors to help him reshape the party agenda. One is the continuance of his delivery politics of bijlee (electricity), paani (water), schools, and hospitals for which his government is known and which the party has encashed in past elections. I recently visited the Mangolpuri area of North West Delhi to get a sense of the impact the just-released Manish Sisodia’s daily padyatras through the city were having.
“Why will we not vote for AAP when our children now learn at school, we can get medical aid, our bijlee-paani is taken care of? And also we can now travel free in the buses,” said a group of women who sold wares on the pavement. “It is wrong they are keeping Kejriwal in jail,” they added.
To retain this sympathy will be Kejriwal’s second objective and he will hope an electoral endorsement will “finish off” the case against him and Sisodia even as it goes on to its legal conclusion. The arrest of the AAP leaders had generated sympathy for the party in certain sections. But with the release of the AAP leaders, the sympathy for them will peter out as time goes by and elections are due five months away. Will Kejriwal’s resignation as CM now regenerate sympathy for him on a different count?

Thirdly, the AAP chief is pitching to regain his moral stature while underscoring his political savvy for which he has been known. Kejriwal knows only too well that every election needs a fresh narrative and he cannot rely on old themes alone.
Who will be his successor, even if it is for a few weeks? Will it be a woman, a Dalit, or his wife? It will only be for a short spell, till November if his request to hold the Delhi elections along with the Maharashtra polls is heeded, or for three months more if the polls are held on schedule in February?
A woman to head the Delhi government could make a difference to the women’s constituency that Kejriwal has been assiduously reaching out to. In his speech on Sunday, he chose to make public the information that he had sent a letter to the Lieutenant Governor from jail, requesting him to let Atishi unfurl the national flag on August 15 in his place but that the letter came back undelivered. Educated, experienced and with a clean image, Atishi, a minister in the Delhi government, could have an appeal for the old “Shiela Dixit constituency” the AAP may want to draw to its side. Though the name of Kejriwal’s wife Sunita is also doing the rounds, it will take away from the moral high ground he is seeking to occupy at this juncture.
Also Read | ‘PR stunt, drama’: BJP on Arvind Kejriwal’s decision to resign as Delhi CM
There are also other names being talked about: Gopal Rai and Saurabh Bhardwaj. The trouble is that, unlike most other parties, the AAP does not have caste or identity-based support to bank on.
Resignation as a weapon

Kejriwal is in line with all those politicians who have wielded “resignation” with great effect as a weapon to get out of difficult situations. Indian political history is replete with these stories: India’s seventh prime minister Vishwanath Pratap Singh resigned from the government of Rajiv Gandhi in 1987 and went on to replace him as PM in 1989. Dr Manmohan Singh threatened to resign as PM in mid-2008 to get his way in the party to push through with the Indo-US nuclear deal.
In the last 10 years, while the people of Delhi have opted for Narendra Modi’s BJP in successive Lok Sabha elections, they have favoured the AAP in the Assembly elections. Even as Kejriwal and the AAP get ready for battle against their main opponent BJP, this time there may be an elephant in the room. That is the Congress. In some ways, despite itself, the Congress is showing signs of being on the revival path because people want it to grow as a national counter to the BJP.
Also Read | Why Arvind Kejriwal is set to resign as Delhi CM: Behind AAP chief’s political calculations
Even though both parties are members of the INDIA alliance, the breakup of the Congress’s alliance with AAP in Haryana could have implications for Delhi and the AAP leadership knows this only too well and is getting ready to do battle alone.
Two days before Kejriwal’s release, when asked about the party’s course of action, Sisodia told this writer, “It will be ball by ball, and we have to decide how to play each ball.” The AAP story will now unfold ball by ball.

(Neerja Chowdhury, Contributing Editor, The Indian Express, has covered the last 11 Lok Sabha elections. She is the author of How Prime Ministers Decide)
==============================
Title:South Kashmir campaign set to end, PDP spots green shoots, Jamaat struggles to get off ground
Date: 2024-09-16T05:40
Synopsys: Since its alliance with BJP, Mufti’s party has been shrinking in its bastion, while NC has been growing.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/south-kashmir-campaign-pdp-spots-green-shoots-jamaat-struggles-9569585/
Content: 
IN A speech in Pulwama on Tuesday, Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) president Mehbooba Mufti credited the people of South Kashmir with “changing the destiny” of Jammu and Kashmir.
“By giving us 16 members, you showed the PDP the path to government,” Mufti said. “Your vote ended the suppression in J&K, your vote ended POTA in Kashmir, your vote disbanded the (Special) Task Force (of J-K Police)… Twenty two years ago, you changed the destiny of Kashmir.”
Mufti was referring to the 2002 Assembly elections, when the party came to power for the first time, in coalition with the Congress. The credit for the PDP’s rise to power, just three years after it was founded by Mufti Mohammad Sayeed in 1999, went clearly to South Kashmir, which gave the party 10 of its 16 seats, falling across the districts of Anantnag, Kulgam, Shopian and Pulwama.

In the subsequent Assembly elections of 2008, the PDP got 12 seats, followed by 11 in 2014.
However, 10 years – and an alliance with the BJP to form the government in 2014 – later, the PDP is struggling to retain its hold. South Kashmir’s 16 seats vote in the first phase on September 18, with the campaign wrapping up on Monday.
Even in the 2019 Lok Sabha polls, held months after the Pulwama attack that left 40 CRPF personnel dead, the disillusionment with the PDP was obvious. While Mufti took the lead in eight out of the 16 Assembly segments, the low voter turnout in traditional PDP areas resulted in her loss to NC first-timer Hasnain Masoodi, a retired High Court judge.
In the recent Lok Sabha polls, the PDP shrank further, with Mufti losing again – from the newly crafted Anantnag-Rajouri seat. Of the 18 Assembly segments that are part of the new seat, Mufti could secure a lead in only three this time, while the NC-Congress’s Mian Altaf (the winner) finished ahead in 15 segments.

Rival NC, which was almost wiped out in South Kashmir once, has now re-established itself, while the Jamaat-e-Islami’s presence in the electoral fray, even if limited, could hurt the PDP as it is targeting the same vote that the party used to command.
PDP’s hopes
The party is counting on the fact that the Assembly elections, happening after 10 years, are different, with both its voters and cadre energised at the renewal of political activity, especially after the Lok Sabha pollls. This will “show results in the Assembly elections,” says a PDP leader.
Popular PDP youth leader Waheed ur Rehman Para, the party’s driving force in South Kashmir, adds: “On the ground, there is no wave for any party. The NC may have some votes but that is for individual candidates and not the cadre. And many of their leaders are upset over not getting tickets.”
Para, who also lost in the Lok Sabha polls, from Srinagar, and is contesting the Assembly elections from Pulwama, adds: “Our strength is our cadre. Our leaders left us, but the cadre is intact.”

According to him, the PDP struggled in the Lok Sabha as it was not able to reach the people and its cadres because of “a government crackdown”. “Even on (Lok Sabha) election day, our workers were picked up to send a message to the people,” he claimed. “Despite that, people voted for us.”
Para says government pressure was also the reason the PDP saw a depletion of its ranks after the abrogation of Article 370 in 2019. Mufti, who was picked up in the mass arrests ahead of the Centre’s move, spent among the longest periods in detention of all leaders of mainstream parties.
In the time since, seven PDP MLAs from South Kashmir have left. Other senior leaders like Abdul Rehman Bhat and Mufti’s uncles Sartaj Madni and Farooq Andrabi have either taken a backseat or announced a break from active politics.
Now the PDP is banking on, what it calls, “pro-people” measures of its previous governments. Addressing a rally in Pulwama, Para raises a slogan, “Yeli yi Mufti (When Mufti will come to power)…”, and the crowd finishes it, “teli chali sakhti (then suppression will be erased)”.

In her speeches, the former CM continuously talks about her government’s decision to withdraw 12,000 FIRs registered against protesters and the disbanding of the police Task Force.
NC’s growth
With the PDP’s “soft separatism” appealing to South Kashmir where militancy has been the most active, the NC had been slowly pushed to the margins here, with the Congress emerging as the PDP’s main – if marginal – rival in the region. But the NC and Congress have never won more than two-three seats each in the region in the past few elections.
(This is not counting the seat of Kulgam, where CPI(M) leader M Y Tarigami has been holding on for four terms.)
In these elections, four of the eight seats that the Congress is contesting in the Valley as part of its alliance with the NC fall in South Kashmir.

An NC leader from South Kashmir refutes the claim that the party had been “wiped out” of the area, saying they are still the PDP’s main rival. “In electoral politics, if you leave space open, someone will fill it. The PDP allied with the BJP despite the fact that it sought votes against the BJP, and this left a window of opportunity open for us… It would be a tough fight between the two of us this time.”
Senior PDP leader Naeem Akhtar, however, argues that the space which became available in the absence of democratic competition in South Kashmir was taken over by militants and separatists, resulting in near total election boycott. In the 2019 parliamentary polls, there was only 8% polling.
“To that extent, it (the NC reviving in south Kashmir) is a welcome sign,” Akhtar says, who also says that “the PDP’s absence was forced”. “. But despite that we are reviving.”
This time, as the election campaign gathered pace, the PDP’s old cadre that had gone silent could be seen on the ground, with the youth in a majority and its election rallies gaining in size. Some leaders who had switched sides after 2019 have returned to the party, with many more seeking to do so.

Jamaat factor
The PDP’s rise in South Kashmir has long been credited to the fact that the Jamaat kept out of elections after denouncing the 1987 Assembly polls, when it contested under the banner of the Muslim United Front. Those elections are widely believed to have been rigged in favour of the NC-Congress alliance, and were the immediate spark for militancy.
This time, after expressing its desire to contest the elections and seeking unsuccessfully that the ban against it under the UAPA be lifted by the Centre, the Jamaat is backing 10 Independents. Four of them are standing in the South Kashmir seats of Pulwama, Zainapora, Kulgam and Devsar.
While the Jamaat has stirred the political scene in Kashmir, both PDP and NC leaders believe it won’t be a factor. “This leadership of the Jamaat (its eight-member panel that decided to contest the elections) isn’t acceptable even to Jamaat cadres,” says a senior NC South Kashmir leader. “The fact is that the original Jamaat cadre didn’t vote in the past and they will not vote even today.”
A former Jamaat leader rejects that its supporters rallied behind the PDP in its absence. “As an organisation, we never endorsed any party nor asked our cadres to vote against one… On the ground, some of our cadres or sympathisers might have voted for a party, but that was their own choice,” says the leader.

Meanwhile, apart from a big rally in Kulgam, the Jamaat campaign has failed to get going, with a large number of its own cadres clearly sceptical about the party’s move.
==============================
Title:5 takeaways from Arvind Kejriwal’s speech: Invoking British Raj to ‘advice’ for non-BJP CMs
Date: 2024-09-15T17:05
Synopsys: Delhi CM stops short of slamming Congress, says he did not resign after arrest as he respects democracy and Constitution is supreme for him
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/invoking-british-raj-non-bjp-cms-five-takeaways-kejriwal-9569306/
Content: 
Three days after he walked out of jail following the Supreme Court granting him bail in the alleged excise policy scam, Arvind Kejriwal announced on Sunday that he was going to resign as Chief Minister in the next two days and demanded Assembly polls to be held in November along with Maharashtra.
In an address to party workers at the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) headquarters, Kejriwal said he would sit on the CM’s chair again “only after people give him a certificate of honesty”.
Five takeaways from the AAP chief’s first address to party workers after his release:
‘Don’t resign… we can run govt from jail’

Kejriwal, who along with former Delhi Deputy CM Manish Sisodia and other AAP leaders was arrested in connection with the alleged liquor policy scam, said his party was the only one that could stand up to the BJP. “The BJP tried to prove him (Sisodia) corrupt. They cannot provide good schools and free electricity to people because they are corrupt. We are honest. They slap false cases against non-BJP Chief Ministers. If other CMs are arrested, I urge them not to resign but run the government from jail,” the Delhi CM said, making a reference to his counterparts Hemant Soren (Jharkhand), Siddaramaiah (Karnataka), Pinarayi Vijayan (Kerala), and Mamata Banerjee (West Bengal).
Kejriwal added that the Supreme Court also suggested in his case that he could run the government from jail, and that he did not resign (after being arrested) “because I respect democracy and the Constitution is supreme for me”.
Invokes AAP icon Bhagat Singh, British Raj
Kejriwal invoked the British Raj several times, including to slam Lieutenant Governor V K Saxena for not heeding to his request to let AAP leader and Delhi minister Atishi hoist the Tricolour on Independence Day in his absence.
“When Shaheed Bhagat Singh was in jail, he wrote letters to many people and the British sent these letters to the people outside. But when I went to jail, I wrote only one letter to the L-G, requesting him that on August 15, Atishi should be allowed to hoist the flag in my place. But that letter was not delivered to the L-G and a warning was issued that if you write a letter to the L-G, your meeting with your family will be stopped.”

Kejriwal also said that while freedom fighters were allowed meetings with colleagues, “my party colleague Sandeep Pathak was not allowed to meet me in jail” after one meeting where they discussed politics. “We are politicians… so we discussed politics.”
Also Read | Arvind Kejriwal bail: Six months later, why he walks out more a politician than a CM
‘People important, not BJP’
Close on the heels of his party’s war of words with the BJP over the Delhi government’s works in slums, Kejriwal, in a bid to stress that he was not “power hungry”, emphasised that he cared for the people and not the BJP.
“I will only sit in the CM’s chair after people give me a certificate of honesty. I want to give ‘agnipariksha’ after coming out of jail. I will become CM and Manish Sisodia Deputy CM only when people say we are honest. For me, the BJP is not important, people are important,” he said.

Referring to his 2014 resignation, the CM said he had quit for his ideals. “I do not have a lust for power,” he added.
‘No attack on Congress’
Interestingly, the Delhi CM stayed shy of attacking the Congress, with which his party recently had unsuccessful seat-sharing talks for the coming Haryana Assembly polls.
The AAP had fought the recent Lok Sabha polls as a part of the INDIA bloc and contested four of the seven seats in Delhi as a part of its alliance with the Congress, which contested three seats. However, the BJP won all seven seats. In Haryana, a section of the Congress is believed to have prevented any truck with the AAP.
‘I lived in slums’
Asking people of Delhi to come out in strength – “jam ke” – and vote, Kejriwal constantly invoked his government’s work in “setting up schools” and said he himself had lived in slums before he forayed into politics and knew how the poor lived.
==============================
Title:Why Arvind Kejriwal is set to resign as Delhi CM: Behind AAP chief’s political calculations
Date: 2024-09-16T05:39
Synopsys: AAP chief’s announcement catches some in BJP off guard; party still in “initial stages” of preparing for the Delhi elections, say BJP insiders.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/arvind-kejriwal-step-down-delhi-cm-9569146/
Content: 
Sending shockwaves through Delhi’s political circles, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal Sunday announced he would resign in two days. He added that his former deputy Manish Sisodia, who was released from jail a month ago, will not succeed him. Both would seek a mandate and prove their innocence in the Delhi excise policy case, said Kejriwal who got out of Tihar jail on Friday after nearly six months in prison in connection with the same case.
While there is no clarity yet on whether only the AAP convener will tender resignation, leaving a caretaker government in place for the time being, AAP sources said the move was in line with its apprehension of early elections in the city announced alongside the Maharashtra and Jharkhand Assembly elections that are slated to be held by December. As per the schedule, the elections in Delhi were set to be held in February 2025.
“The party is in favour of early polls in Delhi to be able to capitalise on the CM’s popularity, which has received another fillip after his release from jail just Friday,” said an AAP source.

Apart from Kejriwal and Sisodia, senior leader Vijay Nair, the party’s communications head, was recently released in the excise case. The CM’s long-time aide, Bibhav Kumar, who was arrested for allegedly assaulting AAP Rajya Sabha MP Swati Maliwal at Kejriwal’s home in May, was also granted bail recently, while senior Rajya Sabha MP Sanjay Singh, got bail in the excise case earlier this year. The release of these leaders has given the party a boost and it has been in election mode this past month.
Must Read | Arvind Kejriwal’s bail: From Supreme Court, a limited relief
The decision to resign was also a result of the two-fold curbs placed on Delhi’s elected government. One set of restrictions placed by the amended Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) Act, which gives more powers to the Lieutenant Governor, especially over the bureaucracy; and second, the bail conditions imposed on Kejriwal that say he cannot go to the Delhi secretariat and his office and can only sign those filed that are meant to be approved or cleared by the Lt Governor.
“It was important to resign after getting bail and not before as it would have been a sign of weakness. Now, the CM is out and can continue in his role but has chosen to do this of his own volition and not under external pressure. The workers have been on the ground but it is true that the repeated attacks on us have left us in a weaker position. The senior leaders will focus on dispelling the rumours that have been spread while they were away and reconnecting with voters,” said a senior AAP leader.
“It is also a principled stand. We believe the people of Delhi will see that neither the CM nor Sisodia is interested in the kursi (power). They are here to work for the people of Delhi,” the leader added.

BJP questions timing
The announcement caught some in the BJP off guard. The party has been aggressively seeking to bolster its attack on the AAP in general and its senior leadership, especially Kejriwal— over the issue of corruption. A BJP source said the party was still in the “initial stages” of preparing for the Delhi elections.
Delhi BJP secretary Harish Khurana questioned the timing of the announcement. “The question is why has he sought two days’ time to resign…it appears that this is an attempt to stage a new drama — that, look, I want to resign but the people don’t want me to,” he alleged.
“Now because there is a Supreme Court order that he cannot go to the (Delhi) secretariat or sign files and there is no basis for him to remain CM, and the people of Delhi and the country are asking tough questions of you that you have started this drama…the question is why not resign today, why this drama?” Khurana added.
Also Read | Arvind Kejriwal bail: Six months later, why he walks out more a politician than a CM
According to another BJP leader, the party has already chalked out a plan to hold the AAP accountable for civic issues “across the 250 municipal wards” in the capital. “The party held several deliberations over the campaign on at least two occasions — including one among the national and state leadership — in Vrindavan over the last few days. The BJP is more than ready to head into the Assembly polls if the need arises,” said the party functionary.

In the Delhi bureaucracy, there is some apprehension about the implementation of the Mukhya Mantri Mahila Samman Rashi Yojana — under which women will be eligible to receive Rs 1,000 monthly — over procedural issues and delay. A government official said, “Less than six months of the tenure of the current Delhi Assembly remains and the Election Commission of India is well within the boundary of rules to allow elections in Delhi along with Maharashtra.”
==============================
Title:Last time Arvind Kejriwal quit as Delhi CM: The 49-day govt and what followed
Date: 2024-09-15T15:10
Synopsys: During the subsequent year-long Central rule, Kejriwal apologised to the people for “leaving the government”. AAP stormed back to power in February 2015, winning 67 of the 70 seats.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/last-time-arvind-kejriwal-quit-as-delhi-cm-govt-and-what-followed-9569089/
Content: 
Days after walking out of jail and during his first visit to the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) headquarters since, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday said he would resign in the next two days and occupy the CM’s chair “only after people elect him again”.
“Despite the court giving us bail, the case will continue. I spoke to my lawyers. Till the case does not end, I will not sit on the CMs seat. After two days, I am going to resign from the post of CM. I will not sit on the CM’s seat till the people elect me and send me to the seat again,” the CM told party workers. If he resigns, it will not be the first time Kejriwal does so.
The Delhi Assembly elections of 2013, the results of which were announced on December 8 that year, threw up a hung verdict with the BJP emerging as the single-largest party winning 31 seats in the 70-member House. The AAP, which made its electoral debut, won 28 seats while the Congress was restricted to 8 and other parties won 3 seats.

The BJP, which was invited by then Lieutenant-Governor Najeeb Jung to form the government, declined the offer even as the three parties — Congress, BJP and AAP — ruled out alliances with each other. Jung then invited the AAP to form the government following which Kejriwal wrote to the BJP as well as the Congress seeking “clarity” on 18 issues. While the BJP declined support, the Congress reportedly agreed on 16 of the 18 issues and extended outside support to the AAP, paving the way for Kejriwal to be sworn in as Delhi CM on December 28, 2013.
Also Read | Kejriwal at Hanuman temple: ‘Lord’s blessings always with me in fight against injustice’
Some of his first moves as CM included initiation of a corruption redress “durbar” and the rollback of FDI in the multi-brand retail sector, a move sanctioned by the previous Sheila Dikshit-led Congress government, citing high unemployment.
Forty-nine days after assuming power, Kejriwal resigned as the CM on February 14, 2014, citing the non-introduction of the Jan Lokpal Bill in the Assembly following which President’s Rule was imposed in Delhi and the House was kept in suspended animation.
After stepping down as CM, Kejriwal unsuccessfully contested the 2014 Lok Sabha polls from Varanasi against then BJP prime ministerial candidate Narendra Modi and lost by a margin of 3.71 lakh votes. In the run-up to the elections, Kejriwal was a victim of two ink attacks even as eggs were hurled at his vehicle during campaigning in Varanasi.

In the run-up to the 2015 Assembly polls, Kejriwal repeatedly apologised to the people for stepping down, terming his 49-day tie-up with the Congress as an “honest mistake”.
“We realised that many people were quite angry with us for having quit the Delhi government. We were asked why we left the government. Earlier, we had decided to hold a referendum and ask people if we should try to form the government. But chances of government formation in the current Assembly are negligible. We will go to the people and hold various meetings with them in the coming days. We will apologise to them, gain their trust and seek their support so that we can come back with a thumping majority,” Kejriwal had said in May 2014.
Ahead of the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, Kejriwal met the autorickshaw driver who had slapped him during a roadshow while accusing the former Delhi CM of being a “liar”. The driver, Lali, was seen apologising to Kejriwal and said he had resorted to the act as he was “angry with Kejriwal for leaving the government in a few days”. He also faced attacks from the “supporters” of his mentor Anna Hazare while campaigning in Haryana in April 2014.
Just ahead of the Assembly polls in February 2015, he apologised again saying many people across Delhi felt that AAP’s actions have let them down. “In May (last year), we apologised to the people of Delhi for the disappointment caused; and in case you missed it the first time, I do so again – so you hear us loud and clear,” he had said.

The AAP stormed to power, winning 67 of the 70 seats, reducing the BJP to 3 seats. The Congress, which lost power nationally months earlier in the national elections, failed to open its account.
==============================
Title:What BJP fielding Muslim candidates in past Haryana polls tells us
Date: 2024-09-15T12:50
Synopsys: This time, the party has fielded two candidates from the minority community, both from the Muslim-dominated seats of Ferozepur Jhirka and Punahana in southern Haryana’s Mewat region.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/bjp-muslim-candidates-haryana-assembly-elections-2024-9568872/
Content: 
In the last five Haryana Assembly elections, the BJP fielded just seven Muslim candidates, none of whom won. However, these nominees did better than the Hindu candidates who had previously contested from these constituencies in the Muslim-dominated Mewat region in south Haryana, with the party’s vote share going up substantially, according to an analysis of past poll results.
This indicates that the BJP, despite its core ideology of Hindutva and perception as a party not aligned with minority interests, remains a choice for Muslim voters in Mewat. The party has a substantial voter base in the region that it successfully taps into when it fields Muslim candidates.
In the coming Assembly elections, two of the ruling BJP’s 90 candidates are from the Muslim community: Naseem Ahmed and Mohammad Aizaz Khan. While Ahmed will contest from Ferozepur Jhirka, where more than 80% of the voters are Muslim, Aizaz Khan is contesting from Punahana, where nearly 88% of the voters are Muslim. Both these Assembly constituencies are in the Muslim-dominated Nuh district in southern Haryana’s Mewat region.

ALSO READ | ‘BJP’s divisive politics a media creation’: Meet party’s Muslim candidates in Haryana Assembly polls
In Ferozepur Jhirka, the 2009 Assembly polls saw the BJP’s Hindu candidate win just 5.29% of the vote share. But in 2014, when the party fielded a Muslim leader from the state, it managed to increase its vote share to 12.09%. That year, Naseem Ahmed was the Indian National Lok Dal’s (INLD) candidate and he managed to win with a 29.47% vote share. In 2019, Ahmed was the BJP candidate from the state and though he managed to increase his vote share to 32.4%, he finished second behind the Congress’s Mamman Khan who had a 57.62% vote share.
In Punahana, though the BJP fielded a Muslim in the 2009 polls, the party got only 1.03% of the vote share. In the 2014 polls, another Muslim candidate increased the party’s vote share to 21.67%, finishing not far behind winner Rahish Khan who had a 29.56% vote share and INLD’s Mohammad Ilyas who got 26.85% of the votes. In 2019, when the BJP replaced him with Nauksham Chaudhary, a Hindu candidate, the party’s vote share fell to 17.65%, with the party again finishing third. Hoping for a reversal, the party has gone with a Muslim face this time.
In the Nuh Assembly seat, where 70% of the voters are Muslim, the BJP fielded a Muslim candidate in 1991 but only managed a 7.84% vote share and a fifth-place finish. In 2005, the next time it contested in Nuh, the party fielded another Muslim candidate but the vote share fell to 1.21%. In 2009, when it fielded Sanjay Singh, a Hindu, in this seat, the vote share jumped to 19.61% and it finished as the runner-up. In 2014, Singh again contested and bagged 19.75% of the votes but failed to win. In 2019, the party fielded a Muslim instead and managed to almost double its vote share to 38.55%, just behind the Congress at 41.77%. For the coming elections though, the party has again reposed its faith in Singh.
On why the BJP’s Muslim candidates were unable to win in the past, the party’s minority wing president in Haryana, Jaan Mohammad, said, “Earlier Muslims were associated with the Congress and Indian National Lok Dal. But now they are coming close to the BJP. They are receiving the benefits of the welfare schemes without any discrimination under BJP rule. They will vote for the BJP in the upcoming elections and the party will win these seats.”

The Congress claimed the BJP’s alleged anti-Muslim rhetoric hurt its electoral prospects. Iqbal Jaildar, a former president of the Haryana BJP minority wing who is now in the Congress, said, “Communal hatred increased after the BJP came to the power at the Centre and in the state in 2014. The BJP’s minority candidates could not win because of certain remarks of BJP leaders. Hatred was not to that extent before 2014.” Jaildar resigned from the BJP in 2018 after the death of Muslim youth in a police shootout. He had contested the 2014 Assembly polls from Punahana on a BJP ticket.
Jaan Mohammad, however, downplayed the alleged communal remarks of BJP leaders, saying, “The public understands that these remarks are for election time only.”
BJP’s Nuh district president Narender Patel claimed Muslims were now drawing closer to the BJP. “The distance of Muslims with the BJP has decreased over the years. They have started attending the BJP’s rallies and other programmes. A lot of development has been done (in Nuh) in the past 10 years. People have got welfare scheme benefits. Nearly 8,000 people have got government jobs in the Nuh district alone. We are hopeful of winning some seats this time,” he said.
==============================
Title:As PM kicks off rallies today, why Haryana is crucial for BJP to win
Date: 2024-09-16T01:38
Synopsys: Given its strategic location where farmer protests have been strongest, and as buffer between Delhi and Punjab, Haryana matters in ways more than one.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/pm-modi-haryana-rallies-bjp-assembly-elections-9567166/
Content: 
As Prime Minister Narendra Modi starts his poll rallies for the Jammu and Kashmir, Haryana Assembly elections, the BJP is hoping it will help shrug off the impression that the party’s campaign is struggling, with rebellions and resignations marking the release of candidate lists in both.
While even a decent number in J&K would be a boost for the BJP, given these are the first elections after its game-changing Article 370 abrogation, senior party leaders fear that a loss in Haryana would have far-reaching implications. Apart from adding to the Opposition momentum coming so soon after the Lok Sabha results, it will mean the loss of a crucial state in terms of both resources and the larger message to the farming community.
Admitting that “the stakes are really high”, a senior party leader pointed out that with Haryana under its control, the BJP could fend off some of the heat from the farmer protests. A loss in Haryana would mean another state going to the Opposition after Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Delhi where the protests have got the most traction, with the BJP suffering a setback in another such state – Uttar Pradesh – recently in the Lok Sabha polls.

“The protesters from Punjab and Haryana could be stopped at the borders before entering the national capital. At the peak of the farmer agitation, Haryana, having a BJP government, could stop it from becoming a national protest. The consequence of losing Haryana means these types of Opposition-mobilised protests and agitations can arrive at Delhi without any checks,” the leader said.
Another aspect of losing Haryana is Gurgaon, which along with Noida in UP is the fastest-developing region for investments and real estate in North India. The other two such hubs, Hyderabad and Bengaluru, are already in Congress-ruled states.
“If Gurugram also goes to the Opposition, it essentially means that almost all the fast-growing metros will be with the Opposition,” said the leader.
Check out | Why Rao Inderjit Singh is almost indispensable to BJP in Haryana
More than hurting the BJP’s kitty, it may mean a substantial addition to the Congress’s, with the Opposition party hamstrung by a severe lack of resources since it lost power one by one across states and the Centre.

What also makes Haryana crucial is that next up is Maharashtra, hosting the commercial capital Mumbai, where the BJP is also facing a tough fight from the Opposition.
Some leaders in the party are raising questions over how the candidate lists were handled, particularly given that this was identified as a prime factor in the setback to the BJP in crucial UP in the Lok Sabha polls.
The BJP’s core team for Haryana includes Union minister Dharmendra Pradhan, election in-charge Biplab Kumar Deb and co-in charge Satish Poonia. While Deb, former Haryana CM Manohar Lal Khattar, CM Nayab Singh Saini, state BJP chief Mohan Lal Badoli and Haryana organisation in-charge Faninder Nath Sharma played a crucial role in candidate selection apart from deciding poll strategy, a source in Haryana noted that the final call was taken by Union Home Minister Amit Shah and BJP national president J P Nadda.
Also read | Haryana Assembly Elections 2024: List of key fights shaping Haryana’s assembly polls
However, sources added, the rebellions did not mean that the candidate selection was flawed. “Unprecedented caution” had been shown in the exercise, a leader said, including accommodating the interests of all significant leaders and addressing their concerns.

No popular or mass leader had been “ignored”, sources pointed out, giving the example of, among others, senior leader and Lok Sabha MP Krishan Pal Gujjar. If he could not get a ticket for his son, at least five of his supporters figure in the list, a source said. Similarly, Union minister of state Rao Inderjit Singh, who has been making noises about wanting to be CM, has got a ticket for his daughter Aarti Singh Rao from Ateli, apart from nine supporters in other seats.
A leader said that almost a dozen candidates carry Khattar’s stamp, five are in on Saini’s recommendations, Bhiwani-Mahendragarh MP Dharambir Singh has got two of his supporters inducted, while ex-MP Sunita Duggal will now fight on the party’s behalf from Ratia.
==============================
Title:Ahead of India vs Bangladesh Test series, here a look at WTC scenarios
Date: 2024-09-16T11:06
Synopsys: WTC scenarios: India favourites to play final again, Bazball's chance takes a hit, Australia, New Zealand and Sri Lanka stay in the hunt.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/ahead-of-india-vs-bangladesh-test-series-here-a-look-at-wtc-scenarios-9570265/
Content: 
Rohit Sharma-led India are favourites to make it into the final of the World Test Championship again, which is scheduled to be played at Lord’s from June 11, 2025.
India, who have lost the previous two WTC finals are currently sitting on top of the points table with home matches to play against Bangladesh and New Zealand, starting from September 19.
Indian will then travel to Australia, who are currently placed in second position, and will play a five-match Border Gavaskar Test series, which most likely will give us the finalists for the third final.

The defending champions Australia also have an away series of two Tests in Sri Lanka.
Sri Lanka can be the dark horse in the WTC final race. Sri Lanka after defeating England in the third Test will have a big chance to give it a shot. Sri Lanka can finish in the top if they manage to win their two home series against New Zealand and Australia. The Dhananjaya de Silva-led team have an away series against South Africa as well.
New Zealand the inaugural WTC champions are currently placed at third place. They will be playing eight WTC matches in the span of the next two-and-half months. Out of those eight, five will be played in the sub-continent against Sri Lanka and India, respectively.
Interestingly, England’s chances to make it to the final has taken a hit after their unexpected defeat at The Oval against Sri Lanka.

World Test Championship (2023-25)
Position Teams Matches Points Per cent Reaming matches
1 India 9 74 68.5 BAN -2 (H), NZ – 3(H), AUS – 5 (A)
2 Australia 12 90 62.5 IND – 5 (H), SL -2 (A)
3 New Zealand 6 36 50.0 SL -2 (A), IND – 3(A), ENG – 3 (H)
4 Bangladesh 6 33 45.8 IND – 2 (A), WI – 2 (A), SA – 2 (H)
5 Sri Lanka 7 36 42.9 NZ – 2(H), SA – 2 (A), AUS – 2 (H)
6 England 16 81 42.2 PAK – 3 (A), NZ – 3 (A)
7 South Africa 6 28 38.9 SL – 2(H), PAK – 2(H), BAN – 2 (A)
8 Pakistan 7 16 19.1 ENG – 3 (H), SA – 2 (A), WI – 2 (H)
9 West Indies 9 20 18.5 BAN – 2(H), PAK – 2 (A)
==============================
Title:Aakash Chopra recalls when current Team India head coach Gautam Gambhir fought with a truck driver
Date: 2024-09-16T09:49
Synopsys: Aakash Chopra says Gautam Gambhir always wore his heart on the sleeve but also calls him a 'short-fused.'
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/aakash-chopra-team-india-head-coach-gautam-gambhir-fought-with-truck-driver-9570157/
Content: 
Former and Delhi opener Aakash Chopra recollected an incident when his former teammate and current Team India head coach Gautam Gambhir fought with a truck driver.
“Gautam is someone who once fought with a truck driver in Delhi,” Chopra said in a podcast with Raj Shamani.
“He got out of his car and climb the truck to grab the collar of the driver because he made a wrong turn and was abusing. I was like, ‘Gauti, what are you doing?’ So that’s made him Gautam.”

Chopra said although Gambhir was a very hardworking cricketer but also called him “short-fused” when it comes to the temperament.
“Passionate guy. Very hardworking when it comes to his craft,” said Chopra.
“A bit serious but scored a lot of runs. He always wore his heart on the sleeve.
“Temperament wise he can be very short-fused. But everyone has a different character.”

A gritty left-handed opener, who was once ranked the best Test batsman, Gambhir has tasted success both as a captain and mentor in IPL.
Gautam Gambhir has had a history of confrontation and conflict with some of the cricketers – the name of Virat Kohli comes to mind – and Gambhir would do well to keep his personal likes and dislikes aside while guiding the Indian team.
Gautam Gambhir is taking up the job when Indian cricket is in a bullish mood, having just won the T20 World Cup. But the atmosphere will not take much time to take a turn if initial results in his tenure don’t go as desired. This is where the head coach needs to keep calm and keep the team in a good headspace.
==============================
Title:Staring at the unthinkable: Brazil’s plight in World Cup qualification points to the rot that entered its footballing soul long ago
Date: 2024-09-16T08:46
Synopsys: Losing four of its last five qualifiers, has put head coach Dorival Junior under immense pressure as superstar players fail to operate as a cohesive unit
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/football/brazils-plight-in-world-cup-qualification-points-to-the-rot-that-entered-its-footballing-soul-long-ago-9570039/
Content: 
Brazil’s latest coach Dorival Junior has waged several battles for survival. As a journeyman defensive midfielder, he turned up for 13 different clubs in 16 years; his 25 years as manager has been scattered across 23 clubs. In between, he outlasted cancer. Yet, his biggest fight for survival could yet to be, as the coach of the most successful football country in the world, a journey intertwined with Brazil’s fate in qualifying for the 2026 World Cup.
The burden on his broad shoulders is inhuman, a crushing weight no other coach in his country has shouldered. It is not to lift the World Cup, a load most coaches in Brazil’s history had to drag, but to qualify for the World Cup. A bloated tournament — a leap from 32 to 48 — could allay some anxiety. Brazil can’t be that bad. ain’t they?
But the eventuality of the world’s most decorated football country, the breathing soul of the game for the romantics, missing out on the tournament is not just a lurid fever dream, but a distinct possibility.

The Selecao have won a lone game in the last five World Cup qualifying matches, losing not only to established rivals Uruguay, Argentina and Colombia, but even to Paraguay. At the COPA America, they crashed out before the last-four for the ninth time in major tournaments outside Brazil since 2009. But the shocking bit was not that they lost in the quarterfinals, but that they reached that stage, brandishing the sort of insipid football that would make the 1994 pragmatists red with rage.
Brazil’s Vinicius Jr, second from right, pokes fun at Lucas Paqueta, during a training session ahead of a World Cup qualifier against Ecuador, in Curitiba, Parana state, Brazil. (AP)
The plain reality, cleansed of romance and nostalgia, is that they are no longer the most superior team in the Americas, rather they are the fourth or fifth best team in the continent, an imitation of an imitation.
Style had long departed Brazilian football, in the last few years it has lost its soul too. Since the 2014 World Cup, the stasis has only been disguised by its imposing history. It is a malaise classical of the fall of the world’s great empires. The decay might have set in long ago, but the brutal reality would hit only when an epochal defeat arrives. Like Brazil failing to qualify. Like how Italy felt eight years ago —now it has become normal and accepted, after they missed out on the subsequent edition too.
The difference was that Italy’s rot was bleedingly obvious. The Serie A’s drop in standards was dramatic. The great talent factory that was AC Milan disintegrated. They stopped producing impenetrable defenders and insouciant forwards, even those staple number nines.

Brazil’s dysfunction is less conspicuous. Personnel-wise, they still boast an army of highly-skilled players. The Real Madrid trident of Vinicius Junior, Endrick and Rodrygo are nightmares for most defenders in La Liga. When Neymar heals his injury, he too would be in the mix. There is no shortage of firepower and sturdiness in midfield. The defence is not slack either; they possess two of the most progressive goalkeepers in the world.
The fall guys
In such a backdrop, the knives are instantly sharpened at the coaches. To an extent, it is reasonable. The coaching standards in Europe have leapt enormously — for all the riches, Brazil has never been a coaching country.
So Brazil identified Carlo Ancelotti as Tite’s successor. But the dream never materialised, and dejected, they sought the exact opposite path and embraced the left-field option of Junior, their third manager in the last two years. Now that they have picked, it’s better that they persist with him, and give him time to build a team, to find the formula that could make them tick.
It’s a strange yet typical modern-day predicament. The coach has those that shimmer in club jerseys, but turn off their light in the famous canary yellow shirts. Maybe, it could be that they could only function in the regimented shapes and systems of the club, their imagination stifled when out of their comfort zone. Not just Brazil, a host of other teams too face this. For instance, the paradox that was Phil Foden for Manchester City and England.

Brazil’s coach Dorival Junior enters the field prior to a qualifying soccer match for the FIFA World Cup 2026 against Ecuador at Couto Pereira Stadium in Curitiba, Parana state, Brazil. (AP)
The chemistry among Brazilian players in the recent outings has been non-existent, each player unto a planet, or a bunch of strangers stitched into a team. In the Paraguay game, the forward-line was toothless, neither creative nor energetic. Midfielders were ponderous – consuming too much time on the ball – functioned without coherence and were frequently outmuscled by the Paraguayans.
But Junior insists the team has improved from when he had taken over. Perhaps, he has a point. He has a clear vision — he has stepped away from the usual 4-2-2-2 to a more modern, possession-based 4-2-3-1. But his teams lack the dynamism to harness the best from the system.
The 62-year-old is popular among the public and media, and has pleaded for patience after every defeat. “We’re working with love and patience. We all want this team to get back to where it once was. The results weren’t what we wanted — I accept that and take responsibility — but I have no doubt that this team will grow from here,” he said after the COPA exit.
He offered another reality check too. “The world has grown and understands football more and more. We face difficult opponents. All the big teams in the world are going through the same thing. It’s harder to get results than it once was,” he had said. It is true, but none of the harsh realities would win him sympathy in his latest fight for survival.
==============================
Title:Chess Olympiad: Two years after Chennai heartbreak, Gukesh on another winning spree
Date: 2024-09-16T08:13
Synopsys: Gukesh has arrived at the Olympiad in Hungary’s capital like a man who has unfinished business. In the four games he has played so far at the Olympiad in Budapest after sitting out the first round, he’s accounted for four strong grandmasters.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/chess/chess-olympiad-2-years-chennai-heartbreak-gukesh-winning-spree-9569684/
Content: 
Eyebrows shot up, heads were cocked and frowns made appearances as some of the world’s top players, including former and current world champions like Magnus Carlsen, Vladimir Kramnik and Ding Liren caught a glimpse of Gukesh’s battle against Azerbaijan’s Aydin Suleymanli, which the teenager from India ended up winning in 38 moves.
There’s something about Gukesh and Olympiads. Two years back, at the Chess Olympiad hosted in his hometown of Chennai, a 16-year-old Gukesh had given one of the first indicators that he was going to be a problem for the rest of the world.
Playing on the top board of the India B team at the Chess Olympiad in 2022, Gukesh (back then ranked World No 20) had gone on a rampage, smiting away at anyone who sat in front of him, even the world’s best players like Fabiano Caruana. But all of his work had been undone in a sense as he had lost against Uzbekistan’s Nodirbek Abdusattorov in the 10th round, which meant that the team lost the tie. What had stung in that game more than the defeat itself was the realisation that even if he had taken a draw in that game, India would have more or less been assured gold as Praggnanandhaa had put India ahead. Eventually, the Indian team had claimed bronze while Uzbekistan took gold.

India’s Gukesh in action in Round 2 of the FIDE Chess Olympiad 2024. (PHOTO: FIDE/Anna Shtourman)
Two years after that heartbreak, Gukesh has arrived at the Olympiad in Hungary’s capital like a man who has unfinished business. In the four games he has played so far at the Olympiad in Budapest after sitting out the first round, he’s accounted for four strong grandmasters — Vignir Vatnar Stefansson (Iceland), Adam Kozak (Hungary), Alexandr Predke (Serbia) and finally Aydin Suleymanli (Azerbaijan) — with an average rating of over 2600.
On Sunday, he claimed his fastest win at the 2024 Olympiad rather than the slow death that he has delivered to other opponents.
Playing with white pieces in a game that saw the Giuoco Pianissimo Variation of the Italian game being used, Gukesh had engine-like accuracy. By the 10th move, he held a 30-minute advantage on the clock. By the 13th move, he was the evaluation bar’s preferred pick to win the contest. By the 15th move, he had a material advantage on the board, with Suleymanli being a rook, and two pawns down.
  View this post on Instagram
  A post shared by FIDE (@fide_chess)
It was really a matter of playing the perfect moves and letting the opponent make mistakes. And Gukesh, who is one of the best calculating players in the sport, did just that, squeezing the life blood out of his opponent’s pieces on the board slowly one move at a time until he was ready to throw in the towel.
By the time both queens were beheaded in the 38th move, Gukesh was one move away from reincarnating a pawn into a queen. It was a completely lost position, and his opponent resigned.

Thanks to the win, Gukesh now has 2775.9 points in the live ratings and is ranked No 5 in the world, just behind compatriot Arjun Erigaisi in the live rankings (which are updated real time as opposed to the FIDE published rankings, which are announced at the end of each month).
Gukesh had, in fact, moved to fifth spot on Saturday itself after winning his almost six-hour battle against Alexandr Predke of Serbia.
INTERACTIVE: How Gukesh defeated Aydin Suleymanli
India thus have three players in the live rankings, with Arjun fourth, Gukesh fifth and Praggnanandhaa in 10th spot.
Spurred by Gukesh, the Indian team defeated the strong Azerbaijan team in the fifth round with a 3-1 scoreline to take two more game points. While Arjun also defeated Rauf Mamedov to claim one full point for India, Praggnanandhaa (facing Nijat Abasov) and Vidit Santosh Gujrathi (taking on Shakhriyar Mamedyarov) settled for draws.
==============================
Title:Saleema Imtiaz becomes first Pakistan’s woman umpire on ICC’s International Development Panel
Date: 2024-09-15T22:47
Synopsys: Saleema joined the PCB's women's umpires panel in 2008 and has officiated in several Asian Cricket Council tournaments over the last three years
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/saleema-imtiaz-becomes-first-pakistans-first-woman-umpire-on-iccs-international-development-panel-9569599/
Content: 
Pakistan’s Saleema Imtiaz became the first woman to be nominated for the ICC International Panel of development umpires said Pakistan Cricket Board(PCB) on Sunday.
“The journey has been filled with hard work and personal sacrifices, but now, standing at the cusp of this new chapter, it all feels worth it,” Imtiaz said in a statement released by the PCB.
“This isn’t just a win for me, it’s a win for every aspiring female cricketer and umpire in Pakistan. I hope my success motivates countless women who dream of making their mark in the sport. This moment reflects the growing influence of women in cricket and the PCB’s commitment to fostering that development.”

Saleema’s nomination on the panel means she is now eligible to officiate in women’s bilateral international matches and ICC women’s events.
Saleema’s daughter Kainat has represented the Pakistan women’s cricket team at the international level. “Ever since Kainat made her debut for Pakistan in 2010, my dream has been to represent my country at an international level,” she said.
“While I’ve had opportunities with the Asian Cricket Council, officiating at the highest level has always been the ultimate goal. I’m now focused on performing to the best of my abilities in both bilateral and ICC matches, and building my reputation as a reliable and respected match official,” she added.
Saleema joined the PCB’s women’s umpires panel in 2008 and has officiated in several Asian Cricket Council tournaments over the last three years.

Saleema’s first on-field appointment in a bilateral series will see her officiate the three-match T20 series between Pakistan women and South Africa women which begins at Multan on Monday.
(With agency inputs)
==============================
Title:Duleep Trophy: Shams Mulani, Tanush Kotian script big win for India A over India D as Ricky Bhui’s ton goes in vain
Date: 2024-09-16T08:14
Synopsys: Having begun the final day needing 9 wickets to get off the mark, India A needed a bit of luck to break the overnight stand between Yash Dubey and Ricky Bhui
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/duleep-trophy-shams-mulani-tanush-kotian-script-big-win-for-india-a-over-india-d-as-ricky-bhuis-ton-goes-in-vain-9569644/
Content: 
Shams Mulani and Tanush Kotian completed the job they began on Day 1, this time with the ball on the final day, bagging seven wickets between them as India A posted a comprehensive win over India D to keep their title hopes alive in the Duleep Trophy. Courtesy the 186-run victory, India A are now placed third in the table with six points, and next face table-toppers India C in their final fixture from Thursday.
Having begun the final day needing 9 wickets to get off the mark, India A needed a bit of luck to break the overnight stand between Yash Dubey and Ricky Bhui. The latter, who ended third day’s play on an aggressive note, continued with his intent even in the morning session as boundaries came with minimum risk against the pacers.
But Dubey’s unfortunate run-out at the non-striker’s end with the ball ricocheting off his bat back to Mulani, who knocked off the bails, gave India A the opening they sought. From there on, apart from Bhui who scored a well-constructed 113, the likes of Shreyas Iyer and Sanju Samson only sparked with cameos as India D remain the only team without a point in the tournament.

In his next over, Mulani made one sneak between Devdutt Padikkal’s bat and pad from round the wicket. With the pitch offering good bounce – a Kotian delivery bounced head high to the wicketkeeper from a good length – they created regular chances. There was also a mini-battle between the two Mumbai spinners and Iyer. Having failed to get off the mark in the first innings, the latter batting at No 5 in the second essay, dealt in boundaries. Using his feet and the crease, he picked gaps effortlessly.
Ricky Bhui batting for India D. (BCCI X)
But like in the first innings, it was yet another tame shot that cut his stay short. Having committed to an aggressive stroke even before Mulani had released the ball, Iyer stayed back to a delivery he should have played off the front foot. He went for a hoick over mid-wicket, but the ball was too full for the shot and sneaked between his legs to give Mulani his second wicket of the morning. Having lost his spot in the Test squad, Iyer seems to be slipping further down the pecking order.
Once Iyer departed, it was Samson’s turn to take over. A very good player of spin, the Kerala batsman used his feet to come down the track and loft Kotian over mid-on for a boundary. Picking length early, he would jump down the pitch and hit Mulani and Kotian for sixes over long-off. Post lunch, with Kotian continuing to offer flight, Samson would take the invitation and pick a boundary and six. But Mulani would eventually send him back, courtesy a faint edge that was pouched safely by Kumar Kushagra.
Though the rest of India D batsmen were in a mood to rush, Bhui took the foot off the pedal. Like any good No 3, he went about constructing an innings, dropping anchor and picking up boundaries whenever an opportunity presented itself. A lofted cover-drive off Kotian’s off-spin brought his century off 170 deliveries.

Kotian’s perseverance would eventually pay off as he removed Saransh Jain, Bhui and Saurabh Kumar during a lengthy spell in the second session. And once the centurion departed, it was only a matter of time before India A walked away with 6 points.
India C go top
Having taken a sizeable lead and a bowler short – Sandeep Warrier has been ruled out of the tournament with a leg injury – India C didn’t press for a win and chose to play it safe against India B. Resuming their first innings at 309/7, India B were bowled out for 322 with captain Abhimanyu Easwaran carrying his bat for 157. Haryana seamer Anshul Kamboj finished with figures of 8/69 and boosted his chance of making it to the India A tour of Australia next month.
Having taken a 193-run lead, India C lost Sai Sudharsan early, but thereafter Ruturaj Gaikwad (62) and Rajat Patidar (42) stonewalled to avoid a batting collapse. India C then declared at 128/4 as both teams settled for a draw.
Brief scores:
India A 290 & 380/3 declared beat India D 183 & 301 (Ricky Bhui 113, Shreyas Iyer 41, Sanju Samson 40; Tanush Kotian 4/73, Shams Mulani 3/117) by 186 runs

India C 525 & 128/4 declared
(Ruturaj Gaikwad 62, Rajat Patidar 42) drew with India B 332 (Abhimanyu Easwaran 157 not out, Narayan Jagadeesan 70; Anshul Kamboj 8/69)
==============================
Title:15-Year-old Jagsher Singh Khangura makes U19 main draw at Smt Krishna Khaitan Memorial badminton
Date: 2024-09-16T08:14
Synopsys: The teenager currently trains as Khelo India trainee at AM (Akshit Mahajan) badminton Academy in Zirakpur, Chandigarh
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/badminton/15-year-old-jagsher-singh-khangura-makes-u19-main-draw-at-smt-krishna-khaitan-memorial-badminton-9569570/
Content: 
Fifteen-year-old Punjab youngster Jagsher Singh Khangura completed a 15-11, 12-15, 15-11 win over Chandigarh’s Krishna Sharma in the fourth qualification round to become one of the youngest to make it to the U19 main draw of the Yonex Sunrise 31st Smt Krishna Khaitan Memorial All India Junior Ranking Prize Money Tournament being played at Tau Devi Lal Sports Complex.
Khangura was cheered by his teacher parents Manpreet Singh and Rashpal Kaur, who have tried a bunch of academies across India to help the youngster improve his game.
The 15-year-old Asian U15 bronze medallist is one of the youngest in the tournaments and with Sunday’s win, his parents travelled from the princely city of Nabha to watch him play over the next week.

“Both my parents are teachers and have always given me the belief that if I can play good, then I should not fear playing against higher age group players. This is the first time that I have made it to the U19 main draw in a national ranking tournament and that was my first target. Hopefully, I can extend my good run here and watch my parents celebrate my U19 wins,” shared the youngster while speaking with The Indian Express.
It was at a school ground near his home that the then seven-year-old Khangura first practised on a badminton court. With his elder sister pursuing MBBS currently, the Nabha youngster’s interest was always in pursuing sport. A two-year training at Polo ground in nearby Patiala under coach Suresh in his U-10 days would see him winning medals at state level before he shifted to Bahadurgarh to train at Shining Star Academy at the age of 11 in 2022.
The 22-months stint at the academy saw him reaching quarterfinals in the All India Ranking tourney in Goa in 2022 before he shifted to Hyderabad to train at Gopichand Academy in Hyderabad. While the Patiala youngster would train in Hyderabad for six months only, he returned home for his ninth standard exams, making it to the quarter-finals in National Junior Ranking tournaments at Jaipur and Panchkula last year.
“When I told my parents about training at Bahadurgarh, they were a bit skeptical of sending me alone but I knew I could manage. Coaches Chandan Kumar and Veronika Pratama would focus on spending time on stroke training like smash or drop or toss for 100-150 shots per 20 minute sessions and would make me compete in U-15 matches too. While I shifted to Hyderabad, I had to shift back for my studies,” says the Indo-British School student Nabha.

Khangura also shifted base to Mumbai to train at Thane Badminton Academy to train under coach Shrikant Vad and alternated with coach Nitesh Kumar at Virar last year.
The stint saw him winning bronze in the 35th U-15 Nationals at Hyderabad, where he also paired up with Dev Ruparelia to win the U15 doubles’ silver. It also secured him a spot in the Indian team for Asian U15 Championship in China, where he reached the U15 semi-finals before losing to compatriot Akash Changmai.
He currently trains as Khelo India trainee at AM (Akshit Mahajan) badminton Academy in Zirakpur, Chandigarh. “Playing in China made me see the Chinese badminton culture and also understand the kind of fitness we need as we grow up. I have been a fan of Lee Chong Wei and the way he used his smash and deceptions. It all came due to his fitness and that’s what juniors like us dream to practice. Even if we can achieve ten percent of it as a junior, it will help us ” signs off the youngster.
==============================
Title:Anmol Kharb, India’s Asian Team Championship golden girl wins first individual international badminton title
Date: 2024-09-16T08:15
Synopsys: Teenager who won multiple decisive matches in victorious Asian Team campaign, secures Belgian International Challenge for first senior crown
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/badminton/anmol-kharb-indias-asian-team-championship-golden-girl-wins-first-individual-international-badminton-title-9569543/
Content: 
Anmol Kharb, India’s breakout badminton prodigy integral to the Asian Team gold medal at the start of 2024, has had an eventful past eight months. Widely lauded for winning decisive tie-clinchers in February, the 17-year-old collapsed in a tearful heap on the court with a viciously swollen ankle at the Uber Cup in May. However, her senior career is properly back on track come September, as she won her first-ever individual title, the Belgian International Challenge at Leuven on Saturday.
“It’s special, this title will remain very close to my heart. But there’s no time or need to celebrate, I play in Poland next week, and have to win so much more,” the Faridabad teenager said after sealing the final, 24-22, 12-21, 21-10, against World No 80 Dane Amalie Schulz.
Anmol displayed her trademark bouncing back and finishing qualities, as she took control of closing-out situations at 19-18, at least three times in the tournament. The youngster also played seven matches in three days, starting out as a qualifier, ranked World No 220.

It was a whirlwind five days of travel and competition, as Anmol got her visa on September 10 and took a flight out to Belgium at 1.20 a.m on September 11, heading straight to the venue to play the first of those seven matches on arrival.
“It was crazy because the visa came only on 10th, then the flight from the stopover was delayed by three hours. So I reached the venue straight at 11.30 am Belgian time, and played the first match at 12.35 pm. All this has to be done to get ranking up and makes you stronger mentally,” the Indian shuttler said, not wanting to complain. The title had eased away all the accumulated exhaustion of the packed schedule.
The semifinal against the Bulgarian World No 68 Kaloyana Nalbantova tested Anmol’s fortitude before she won 21-13, 24-26, 21-19. She had been dragged into a decider after frittering two match points, and the Olympian closed in from 16-19 with sustained pressure. “Last game got tough. I used to think Asian players are tougher because of speed and Europeans will be easy. But European women are playing with a lot of wrist power and are stronger in long rallies,” she felt.4
Anmol Kharb in action. (FILE photo)
In the final against Schulz, Anmol was 11-14 down in the opener. “It was a good final, where I fought back in the first game, had a lot of negatives, errors at the start of the second, but reversed momentum playing well in the third. I just told myself at the start of the third that it’s a new game, and I have to regain focus,” Anmol added.

Injury setback
The return from the Uber Cup had been tearful after she crashed on the court, and the ankle ballooned and grew bluish-red. “It was difficult because doctors said I couldn’t play for 1-2 months. Even after I returned, the fear of injury persisted about movement on court and even taking a lunge step,” she said.
The youngster would slowly recover, and was kept motivated by coaches. At her lowest, Uber Cup coach Parupalli Kashyap would tell her that she remained a class-player, and invite her to train at the Gopichand Academy in Hyderabad. “We knew we had to train harder to make the next level, so when he said I could try and see if I liked it, my mother and I shifted to Hyderabad. It was tough to adjust because I’d never lived at a hostel. But now I’m settled at the academy and my mother makes food, so there’s no problem. My father, who coached me first at 10-11, is accompanying me as coach,” Anmol said.
She was told by coach Gopichand that training would be hard, and take a bit of time to start showing results. “There’s been a huge change in my game. Many mistakes needed correcting and technique had to be strengthened. But I had to be patient and understand that results won’t come immediately. It’s still tough, the senior circuit – speed, power and different games – but slowly I’ll start winning more,” she insisted.
The biggest input coaches would drill into her was to start thinking like a champion. “They said the mindset has to be to win every match, no matter what, finding solutions and not cribbing. Also, to not be happy with smaller titles, though I can’t help feeling happy today because it’s my first individual title,” Anmol said, feeling giddy gleeful.

Her on-court fitness work has considerably increased. “Earlier, I used to run a lot. Now of the three physicals, two are outside, off court, but the toughest is on-court, mostly shadows and agility,” she said.
The Poland International Challenge will be another wringer of five matches in three days at Lublin, though she’s already in the main draw, starting Friday. She runs into Schulz again in Round 1, and will learn plenty about fighting off the wrath of the vanquished in head-to-heads, and playing back-to-back tournaments.
“Jeetna hi hai (Must win) is the mentality I have to adopt, though opponents don’t make it easy,” she chuckles.
==============================
Title:Pakistan all-rounder Imad Wasim says he ‘was surprised’ at Babar Azam’s reappointment as captain for T20 World Cup 2024
Date: 2024-09-15T18:47
Synopsys: However, despite the change in captaincy Pakistan had poor returns at the showpiece event
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/pakistan-all-rounder-imad-wasim-says-he-was-surprised-at-babar-azams-reappointment-as-captain-for-t20-world-cup-2024-9569479/
Content: 
Premium batter Babar Azam stepped down as captain of Pakistan after a disappointing ODI World Cup in 2023 hosted by India. Fast bowler Shaheen Shah Afridi was made the skipper in the aftermath for the white-ball team. However, after one series against New Zealand Babar was re-appointed as the captain for the 2024 T20 World Cup co-hosted in West Indies and the United States.
“Yes, I was surprised What can I say, it’s ultimately the selector’s call. Whatever they thought was the best option, they picked and they picked the team [accordingly],” said all-rounder Imad Wasim on Babar’s re-appointment as captain to a local sports platform. “Everybody in Pakistan was surprised, not just me. So, I can’t say no that I was not surprised,” he added.
However, despite the change Pakistan had poor returns at the showpiece event. They lost to the associate nation United States and eventual champions India and failed to qualify for the next round. “Yeah, our performance wasn’t up to the mark, to be honest, and we have to accept that, including myself. So yeah, but it is what it is. I think we had a good side, but it didn’t click.” Wasim said.

Wasim during the World Cup in a press conference blamed players’ fear of failure for not being able to compete against the top teams of the world. “The problem is our team is so good, our players are so good, that we are good enough to play any kind of cricket. We haven’t tried that but the thing is you have to try that, you have to get rid of the fear of failure. In everything – batting, bowling, fielding, you have to get rid of fear of failure.
“Personnel change doesn’t change anything, just changing the mindset can change a lot of things. The same ball can be hit for a six, a four, a single, and that same ball can take a wicket and be a dot ball,” he added.
==============================
Title:Travis Head on batting against Indian team: ‘Don’t feel like they’re my favorite…we play them enough, play them lots’
Date: 2024-09-15T17:30
Synopsys: Head has scored 715 runs from 10 matches against India in Test match cricket and ODI cricket he amassed 345 runs from nine games
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/travis-head-on-batting-against-indian-team-dont-feel-like-theyre-my-favorite-we-play-them-enough-play-them-lots-9569270/
Content: 
Australia have defeated India in two finals in 2023. One was at the Oval in the World Test Championship final and the other one was at Ahmedabad in ODI World Cup final. In both instances, it was Travis Head who played the protagonist for the Kangaroos. The ton in London was a counter punch after a sedate start on Day 1 from the left-hander and the ton at the Narendra Modi Stadium was wait and watch initially and then change the gears kind of an inning.
“I don’t feel like they’re my favorite,” Head said speaking to Star Sports after receiving Player Of The Match for both his match-winning knocks. “I just feel like we play them enough, play them lots. And, I guess the last couple of years I’ve been in nice form. So yeah, being able to, to play well, it’s always nice.”
Not your orthodox attacking player
Head has scored 715 runs from 10 matches against India in Test match cricket and ODI cricket he amassed 345 runs from nine games. “They’re extremely difficult but it’s been nice to play well in a couple of games and looking forward to preparing well and being ready to go and let’s look, hope hopefully I can, I can contribute to what’s a successful summer for us,” the 30-year-old added.

He is an attacker, but not one reliant on blind power. He is more of glides and deflections, punches and slashes. The soul of his batting, he once said, is, “how I line the ball up, where I line the ball up and where I’m trying to play it.”
It’s a technique he honed while playing with his father Simon at the Tea Tree Gully CC in Gawler, a quaint town in South Australia. Even before he turned five, he was tagging along with his father and brother Ryan. “The boundaries were short, there was not much swing, or bounce, and that probably shaped my technique,” he would say.
==============================
Title:Neeraj Chopra reveals competing in Diamond League Final with fractured hand, shares scans after 2nd-placed finish to season
Date: 2024-09-15T16:24
Synopsys: Neeraj Chopra, who has also been in discomfort with a groin niggle during the recent Paris Olympics, revealed that he had suffered a fracture in his left hand during training earlier this week.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/sport-others/neeraj-chopra-diamond-league-final-hand-fracture-x-ray-scans-2nd-place-9569183/
Content: 
India’s javelin throw superstar Neeraj Chopra revealed that he had featured in Saturday night’s Diamond League Final with a fractured hand.
Battling in the seven-man javelin final, Neeraj ended his season with a second-place finish behind Grenada’s Anderson Peters by only one centimetre.
Neeraj’s third attempt of 87.86 metres was only bettered by Peters’ 87.87-metre throw in his first try. Germany’s Julian Weber, with his best attempt of 85.97 metres, finished third.

Neeraj, who has also been in discomfort with a groin niggle during the recent Paris Olympics, revealed that he had suffered a fracture in his left hand during training earlier this week.
“As the 2024 season ends, I look back on everything I’ve learned through the year – about improvement, setbacks, mentality and more.
“On Monday, I injured myself in practice and x-rays showed that I had fractured the fourth metacarpal in my left hand. It was another painful challenge for me. But with the help of my team, I was able to participate in Brussels,” the 26-year-old Chopra wrote on X on Sunday.
As the 2024 season ends, I look back on everything I’ve learned through the year – about improvement, setbacks, mentality and more.
On Monday, I injured myself in practice and x-rays showed that I had fractured the fourth metacarpal in my left hand. It was another painful… pic.twitter.com/H8nRkUkaNM
— Neeraj Chopra (@Neeraj_chopra1) September 15, 2024
The 26-year-old Indian, who had won the Diamond League trophy in 2022 before finishing second last year, had booked a place in the Brussels final after finishing fourth in the overall DL standings. The Paris Olympics silver medallist secured 14 points from his back-to-back second-place finishes in Doha and Lausanne.
“This was the last competition of the year, and I wanted to end my season on the track. While I couldn’t meet my own expectations, I feel this was a season in which I learned a lot. I am now determined to return, fully fit and ready to go. I want to thank all of you for your encouragement. 2024 has made me a better athlete and person. See you in 2025,” Chopra added.

The Tokyo Olympic champion’s best throw this season came last month in the Laussane leg of the Diamond League, with an attempt of 89.49m, his career second-best, and four centimetres more than his silver-medal-winning attempt in Paris a fortnight before.
He had won the Lausanne leg of the Diamond League in 2022 and 2023 and finished second behind Jakub Vadlejch in the winner-takes-all finale in Eugene, USA, last year.
– With PTI inputs
==============================
Title:After historic series win against Pakistan, Bangladesh captain Shanto emphasizes on ‘process’ to get ‘good results’ against India
Date: 2024-09-15T16:22
Synopsys: However, despite the series win against The Men in Green Shanto did acknowledge that the series against India is "definitely going to be a very challenging series
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/after-historic-series-win-against-pakistan-bangladesh-captain-shanto-emphasizes-on-process-to-get-good-results-against-india-9569113/
Content: 
After a historic result against Pakistan last month Bangladesh will now travel to India for two-match Test series which will start on Thursday. Despite being behind in the games Najmul Hossain Shanto’s men managed to whitewash Shaan Masood’s men with grit and determination in their backyard.
However, despite the series win against The Men in Green Shanto did acknowledge that the series against India is “definitely going to be a very challenging series.” Speaking to reporters as quoted by a Bangladeshi publication The Daily Star the Bangladesh captain emphasized getting the processes right which will eventually lead to good results. “Things that matter to win, the process matters…our aim will be to do the work properly. Good results are possible if we do our job properly.”
Shanto also further said, “After a good series there is definitely an extra confidence in the team, in the people of the country. Every series is an opportunity. We will play to win both matches.

“If you see the ranking, they are much ahead of us,” Shanto stated. “We have been playing well lately. We have had a good series. Our aim will be to play well for five days. The result comes in the last session on the last day. If we play good cricket for five days, there is a chance for either team to win in the last session.”
Red-soil pitch for Test
With Bangladesh used to playing on black soil pitches at home that are usually on the slower side, India are set to play the first Test on a pitch which predominantly has red soil content. Though there are still five days to go for the Test, the pitch which had a good grass cover was covered by the groundstaff as early as 11.30 am to prevent it from breaking.
Like in 2019, when they rolled out seamer-friendly conditions in Indore and Kolkata – India’s spinners picked only five of the 40 Bangladesh wickets to fall, it shouldn’t come as a surprise if the hosts follow a similar tactic this time as well.
==============================
Title:Mohammed Shami says India are favourites and Australia need to be worried for Border-Gavaskar Trophy
Date: 2024-09-15T14:49
Synopsys: Earlier, former Indian cricketer Sunil Gavaskar predicted India to win the series once again with a scoreline of 3-1
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/mohammed-shami-says-india-are-favourites-and-australia-need-to-be-worried-for-border-gavaskar-trophy-9569065/
Content: 
2014/15 is the last series when Australia defeated India in a Test series. Since then India has been dominant against Kangaroos both home and away winning four series straight in a row. Indian after-bowler Mohammed Shami would even go on to say Australia needs to be worried for the upcoming series later this year Down Under.
“We are the favorites, they should be worried,” Shami said as quoted by PTI. “I am working hard to make a comeback soon because I know I have been out of action for quite some time. However, I want to ensure there is no discomfort when I return. I’ve to work on my fitness, so that there is no discomfort,” the 34-year-old said.
Earlier, former Indian cricketer Sunil Gavaskar predicted India to win the series once again with a scoreline of 3-1. “It’s going to be an exciting series for sure with the talent that is there on both sides and it will also show why Test match cricket is the ultimate format of our beloved game. Oh, and my prediction is a 3-1 win for India,” Gavaskar wrote in his column for the mid-day.

“With their opening batting problems exacerbated after the retirement of David Warner and the middle-order also a bit dodgy, the Aussies are ripe for the taking once again,” reasoned Gavaskar.
Gavaskar would also emphasise that the lack of first-class games ahead of the series might cause India to start slowly yet again. “India being usual slow starters in an overseas series in SENA (South Africa, England, New Zealand, Australia) countries the first Test will be crucial. That they aren’t playing proper first-class games before that as well as in the week long gaps between some Test matches could work against them,” he wrote.
“That said, it is how schedules are nowadays for most touring sides. It is tough on inexperienced newcomers as Yashasvi Jaiswal found in South Africa last year. He came back brilliantly with over 700 runs against England at home,” Gavaskar wrote.
==============================
Title:India Test series provides pathbreaking moment for Bangladesh: The first 150-kph-er in Nahid Rana and Hasan Mahmud, with unique action, raise fast-bowling hopes
Date: 2024-09-16T08:13
Synopsys: India vs Bangladesh: In unison, Nahid Rana and Hasan Mahmud are re-imaging the cricket identity of their country, from a land of left-arm spinners to fast bowlers.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/india-vs-bangladesh-fast-bowlers-nahid-rana-hasan-mahmud-9568849/
Content: 
A speed merchant nudging 150kph, a sui generis in his country; a seam and swing merchant with dexterous wrists and a natural gift of bending the ball either ways; a beanpole left-arm quick coaxing unnerving lift and slippery pace; an exciting but erratic talisman discovering precision to ally his pace; a stream of young quicks bristling about in the domestic circuit. In unison, they are re-imaging the cricket identity of their country, from a land of left-arm spinners to fast bowlers.
For much of their existence in international cricket, left-arm finger spinners formed the breathing soul of Bangladesh. The first famous cricketer from the pre-independent era was a left-arm spinner with handlebar moustache, Ramchand Goala; its first cult hero, Mohammed Rafique, practised left-arm spin too; its first superstar cricketer, Shakib Al Hasan, was inevitably a left-armer too. Left-arm spinners have accounted for 39 percent of Bangladesh’s wickets in Test cricket. The in-house banter used to be that if someone flipped a coin in the anarchic streets of Dhaka, a left-arm spinner would catch it. But the new crop of fast bowlers is shifting stubborn perceptions.
For the first time in their history, seamers took all ten wickets in an innings, en route to winning the first Test against Pakistan. The first time they won a Test, in Harare, left-armers hoarded 11 of the 20 wickets. But Test wins arrived only sporadically until the stroke of 2023 (16 in 134). In the next 20 months though, they won five of eight. It is little coincidence that those— one fourth of their Test wins ever—have arrived after they built a serious pace pack. Left-arm spinners still influence games, but so do the seamers. Ebadot Hossain and Taskin Ahmed starred in the victory over Afghanistan, Hasan Mahmud and Nahid Rana headlined the historic feat over Pakistan.

The surge of Rana could be a prospectively pathbreaking moment for Bangladesh fast bowling. He is his country’s first 150-kph-er. Until four years ago, the quick from the regally sounding Chapainawabganj in north western part of Bangladesh had no serious aspirations about the game. His father wanted him to focus on academics, but he snuck out with friends to play tape-ball cricket.
Impressed by Nahid Rana @BCBtigers. He has a good technical action. Semi front on bowler with a large arm pull and shoulder hip separation. Terrific base alignment. On release he could be better in alignment with bowling arm and head but one of the better actions out there. And… pic.twitter.com/Bh8rvZ3Zkp
— Ian Pont Official (@Ponty100mph) September 12, 2024
During one of the tournaments, he caught the eye of former Test fast bowler Alamgir Kabir, a coach at the Clemon Academy, a chain of cricket schools launched by former captain Khaled Mashud. “We were playing tape ball cricket and we needed a fast bowler. A local coach sent us Nahid. The keeper said he could barely see the first four ball. I kept for a ball and I couldn’t see it either,” Kabir tells The Indian Express.
The surge of Rana could be a prospectively pathbreaking moment for Bangladesh fast bowling. He is his country’s first 150-kph-er. (AP)
The latter took him under his tutelage at the Rajshahi branch of the academy. He was uncut, had a weird action wherein he held the ball with both palms. Alamgir refined and regimented it, initially dropping pace before gaining it. Talha Subair, another fast bowler turned coach, solved his no-ball woes. Four years after the fateful tape-ball game, he co-instigated Bangladesh’s maiden series win over Pakistan. In the mecca of the mystique paceman, on the red earth that chiselled Shoaib Akhtar, he troubled the finest of Pakistan batsmen in Rawalpindi.
Twice he devoured Babar Azam, harassing him for pace generated from his shoulders and upper body. In the first innings of the second Test, he softened him up with short balls, before sliding the fuller one, which back-foot tied Babar drove, only to slash the ball back onto the stumps. In the first essay of the second innings, he grabbed him with a good-length bouncing ball that held the line after landing, grazing the edge.
Those are balls that leave an impression on batsmen, where you are not coaxed into indiscretion, but you couldn’t configure the delivery’s sting. He left Mohammed Rizwan with physical scars too. His career is nascent still, there is guarded optimism that he could be his country’s finest.

BCB director and a mentor to most cricketers from his country, Nazmul Abedeen Fahim buzzes with excitement. “To see a bowler from Bangladesh bowl 150 clicks is indeed exciting. Back in the day, we had just one medium pacer and the rest were all spinners. We have a good fast bowling stock, different types of them, we have diversity in the spin department. Such an attack is required to win Tests on a consistent basis abroad. All the great sides had great fast bowlers,” he explains.
If Nahid discomfits with raw pace, Hasan Mahmud tricks batsmen with movement either direction at lively pace. Monikered the Laxmipur Express, he runs through his action with a negligible jump during the load-up, rather a long stride, like some of the Caribbean quicks of the 90s. He has a sumptuous wrist position, which he worked extensively with former national coach Sarwar Imran.
“He has a unique action that confuses batsmen. Besides, he has variations that he smartly employs, apart from swing and pace” Sarwar says. Shakib Al Hasan dwelled on his wits: “Though he is young he has got a very good brain and has a good game sense, he can read the game well.” The former fast bowling coach Otis Gibson says he “could be an enormously important cricketer for his country.”
nahid rana bowled babar pic.twitter.com/BdS29Uda6Q
— zuann (@_zuann_) August 25, 2024
His entry was dramatic. Called to bowl in the nets, he troubled the whole lot, from Shakib Al Hasan and Mushfiqur Rahim to Litton Das and Najmul Hossain Shanto.
Complementing them is the six foot three Shoriful Islam, another bowler sculpted by the hands of Alamgir, hailing from the northernmost outpost of Bangladesh, at Nogordanga in the Panchagarh village. The son of a rickshaw puller, after unseasonal rain ravaged his farms, professional cricket was beyond his dreams.

“There were days when I survived on one meal a day, or a fruit. There was no electricity in our home. So, to watch cricket I used to walk or cycle to a village some two kilometres away from home,” he told Daily Star. Playing cricket and volleyball was an escape from the everyday realities. A scout from Dinajpur centre of the Clemons Academy happened to spot him, from where Alamgir fast-tracked him to Rajshahi.
Auguring their depth are Ebadot Hossain and Khaled Ahmed. The latter is 30, perennially injury-prone but is lethal when fit and fresh. Ahmed is 31, but options don’t hurt in a county where fast bowlers have poppadom physiques.
For the first time in their history, seamers took all ten wickets in an innings, en route to winning the first Test against Pakistan. (AP)
Marshalling them is Taskin Ahmed. The perennially injured fast bowler might have featured in only 14 Tests, but when he burst through as a genuine quick a decade ago, he captured a generation of youngsters. “I think Taskin and Mashrafe Mortaza were important figures in capturing the imagination of the country more fertile to spinners. So more and more youngsters began to bowl fast,” says Fahim.
The spurt of fast bowlers is part coincidence and part design. “After 15-20 years in cricket, you start looking at what other countries are doing and you get inspired, you get role models. Pakistan, and India in recent times, have produced good fast bowlers, and naturally we too got inspired,” he says.

The biggest factor, Fahim believes, is the robust coaching at grassroots. “We were blessed to have so many fast bowlers taking up coaching after retirement,” he says. Alamgir is a classic example—he mustered just three wicketless Tests, but buried his disappointment by committing his life to grooming young pacers. So are Talha Jubair and Rubel Hossein, a host of men lost in Bangladesh’s spin-fixated era. The fundamentals imparted, they passed through the battle-hardened hands of international coaches. At some juncture, they had all been coached by one of Allan Donald or Gibson, or both.
After the conquest of Pakistan, Donald instantly posted a picture of the Bangladesh quicks on his Facebook wall. He later told Daily Star about how he helped them eliminate the fear factor: “One of my biggest challenges was to get the fear factor out of the dressing room. What I mean by fear factor is that guys are a little bit fearful of making mistakes.” An inferiority complex of sorts. But Donald, with whom the group still interacts, gradually convinced them to shed that fear.
The pace bloom comes with riders. Most of them are young and still raw. The bowlers from the region are notoriously injury-prone. The next stage of development is equally important, says Fahim. “Keeping them fit is important. If we nurture them, keep them injury free and continue the development trajectory, we could certainly be competitive,” he says. En route, they would burn perceptions and the coin joke.
==============================
Title:Diamond League Final: Neeraj Chopra battles fracture in hand to finish 1cm short in javelin throw season finale
Date: 2024-09-16T08:15
Synopsys: Chopra competes despite fracture in fourth metacarpal of left hand and throws spear 87.86m, finishing just behind Anderson Peters at Diamond League Final
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/sport-others/diamond-league-finals-neeraj-chopra-ends-season-with-second-placed-finish-misses-title-by-1cm-9568754/
Content: 
One centimetre. In the end, that was all that separated Neeraj Chopra and Grenada’s Anderson Peters. On a cold night in Brussels, it was an equally cold way to miss out on a second Diamond League Final title.
The Grenadian started the night with an 87.87m throw, which was eventually enough to seal the win. Neeraj, however, came within the smallest measurable distance. With his third throw of the spear, the Indian managed 87.86m to get within 0.01m of Peters and finished the season in second place.
It also summed up the kind of year the Tokyo Olympics gold medallist has had. After all, 2024 started with Neeraj finishing second at the Doha Diamond League meet by 2 centimetres. The season tested Neeraj’s abilities to the fullest.

And yet, sample this for a return: One Olympic Games silver medal, a runner-up finish in athletics’ most important international event apart from Paris, three throws beyond 89m for his career’s second, third, and fifth-best marks. All while nursing an injury.
On Sunday, Neeraj revealed that he competed in Brussels with a fractured fourth metacarpal in his left hand, an injury he suffered in training earlier in the week. “This was the last competition of the year, and I wanted to end my season on the track. While I couldn’t meet my own expectations, I feel this was a season in which I learned a lot. I am now determined to return, fully fit and ready to go,” he said in a social media post, about another ‘painful challenge’.
By the yardstick of any elite athlete, it has been a successful season. But, just like that night at the Stade de France in Paris, Neeraj’s reactions at the King Baudouin Stadium on Saturday night gave out vibes of a man searching for something elusive.
The Diamond League finale was an event of two halves for Neeraj. Two of his best throws of the night came in the first half. And the common factor between those was that Neeraj was standing upright at the end of his follow-through. The left leg’s blocking action seemed consciously pronounced as he tried to avoid falling over to his left. The third throw, especially, is likely to be the template for the future. Nice easy pace on the runway, straighter, unbent left leg at the point of release, and finishing just inside the white line. The result was 87.86m.

But with each of his last three throws, Neeraj once again reverted to the style that one has seen in the past. As he tried to find that little bit extra – a couple of centimetres, literally – he leaned to the left side and overbalanced, falling over after releasing the spear.
“Right now, his throws aren’t right technically,” Neeraj’s physio Ishaan Marwaha had told The Indian Express after the Lausanne Diamond League event. “When he throws, he falls towards the left and so, the javelin also travels towards the left. He falls because the block leg isn’t straight when he is releasing, it bends. So, he is not able to put all his force into the javelin.”
Tough challenge
Conditions on the night didn’t lend themselves to big throws either. All the throwers made their way to the playing area in full winter gear. “It was rather cold tonight and in the warming-up area, there was no track, only grass. When we come to the stadium, the track is rather hard and the difference is big, so that made it a little difficult for us javelin throwers,” third-placed Julian Weber said after the event.
After his sixth throw, Neeraj fell again but got up with a roar. Now, that is a familiar sight. He seemed to like what he managed with the last competitive release of javelin in 2024. But it wasn’t quite enough. After exchanging some notes with his coach Klaus Bartonietz, the customary embraces followed with his opponents as the season wound down. And finally, there was a hint of a smile as the Indian star posed for a few customary selfies with fans.

Back in September 2022, Neeraj won the Diamond Trophy (the prize that winners of the Diamond League Final get) and said afterward in Zurich that he finally truly felt like a big part of global athletics. Tokyo happened in front of empty stands, and while Neeraj was already no stranger to winning, to see himself as one of the centres of attraction at a proper global athletics-only event, felt special. And he seemed to be revelling in it, enjoying the occasion.
Starting from Paris though, Neeraj has been throwing like he is carrying the weight of the world on his shoulders. As he steps away from the bright lights of the world’s biggest stages for a quieter off-season, he will begin the process to return to peak physical fitness.
That is vital for the Indian to achieve his ultimate goal in his chosen field. “I feel there is a better throw left in me. Until I get that, shanti nahi mil paegi (I won’t be at peace),” he had said after the silver at the Olympics. Perhaps that bigger throw might come with that peace.
PTI adds:
On Friday night, national record holder 3000m steeplechaser Avinash Sable finished ninth in Brussels. Sable, who turned 30 on Friday, clocked 8 minute and 17.09 seconds to finish second-last in the 10-man field in his debut DL final. Amos Serem of Kenya emerged as the Diamond League champion in a time of 8:06.90, while reigning Olympic and world champion Soufiane El Bakkali (8:08.60) of Morocco was second.
==============================
Title:Congress gets chairs for 3 committees in Lok Sabha, 1 in Rajya Sabha
Date: 2024-09-16T11:35
Synopsys: Highly placed sources told The Indian Express that in the Lok Sabha, the Congress will get chairs for the External Affairs Standing Committee, Standing Committee on Agriculture and the Standing Committee on Rural Development.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/parliament-standing-committees-congress-chairs-lok-sabha-rajya-sabha-9570312/
Content: 
The negotiations for the Parliamentary Standing Committees between the government and the Opposition are over, with the Congress having managed to get chairs for three committees in the Lok Sabha and one in the Rajya Sabha.
Highly placed sources told The Indian Express that in the Lok Sabha, the Congress will get chairs for the External Affairs Standing Committee, Standing Committee on Agriculture and the Standing Committee on Rural Development. In the Rajya Sabha, the Opposition party will get the Standing Committee for Education.
Negotiations between the government and the Opposition parties had been ongoing over the committees for a couple of months.

The Congress had sought chairs for five Parliamentary Standing Committees — four of Lok Sabha and one of Rajya Sabha. One chair each is also likely to be granted to INDIA partners the Samajwadi Party, DMK, and AITC. For the one chair in the Rajya Sabha committees, the Congress had sought the crucial Committee on Home Affairs.
Several rounds of meetings between the government representatives and Opposition members took place before the government decided to allocate the standing committee chairs to the Opposition. The meetings were attended by Parliamentary Affairs Minister Kiren Rijiju, and Union Minister of State for Law and Justice and Parliamentary Affairs Arjun Ram Meghwal. The Congress was represented by Deputy Leader in the Lok Sabha Gaurav Gogoi, and chief whips of the parties Kodikunnil Suresh and Hairam Ramesh.
On August 16, five standing committees of Parliament were constituted, with Congress MP and general secretary in charge (organisation) K C Venugopal being named as the chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts. The post of chair of the Committee on Public Accounts as per convention is given to the Opposition.
Also Read | India’s Parliamentary Committee System: Unveiling its origin, significance and challenges
The other committees constituted were the Committee on Welfare of Other Backward Classes, which will be headed by Ganesh Singh (BJP), Committee of Estimates, which will be headed by Sanjay Jaiswal (BJP), Committee on Public Undertakings, which will be headed by Baijayant Panda (BJP), and the Committee on Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, which will be headed by Faggan Singh Kulaste (BJP).

On August 27, All India Trinamool Congress MP Derek O’Brien had written to Leader of the House in Rajya Sabha J P Nadda over the delay in the re-constitution of department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees (DPSCs). In his letter, O’Brien said that the delay in the constitution of the committees has profound implications for the democratic process and the quality of legislation enacted.
In the last Lok Sabha term, when the Congress had 53 members, the party had the chairmanship of just one committee. This time, the Congress has 99 members in the Lok Sabha while other Opposition parties like the Samajwadi Party (37), TMC (29), and DMK (22) have considerable numbers in the Lok Sabha. These parties are also expected to get some representation in the House committees.
==============================
Title:Swanky cars to jewellery worth crores, what Haryana’s political dynasts have declared in poll affidavits
Date: 2024-09-16T07:38
Synopsys: While Dushyant Chautala owns a Toyota Fortuner, his brother Digvijay owns a Range Rover, BJP’s Shruti Choudhary owns a BMW X1 and Mini Cooper along with her spouse
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/what-haryana-political-dynasts-have-declared-in-poll-affidavits-9569977/
Content: 
Several of the political dynasts contesting the October 5 Haryana Assembly elections own swanky cars and gold and silver worth crores, their election affidavits show.
The richest among these dynasts is former Deputy Chief Minister and Jannayak Janta Party (JJP) chief Dushyant Chautala, who is contesting from Uchana Kalan. He has declared assets worth Rs 122.48 crore – Rs 44.03 crore movable and Rs 78.54 crore immovable – with sources of income listed in his poll affidavit as “agriculture, salary and business”. While Dushyant owns a Toyota Fortuner, he and his wife collectively own 5.6 kg of gold worth Rs 4.14 crore and diamonds worth Rs 2.63 crore.
The JJP chief’s brother Digvijay and the party’s candidate from Dabwali, along with his spouse, has declared assets worth Rs 102.17 crore. While he owns a Range Rover, the couple owns 4.6 kg of gold worth Rs 3.4 crore and diamonds worth Rs 1.96 crore. Digvijay, like his brother, has also listed “agriculture, salary and business” as his sources of income.

Arjun, Dushyant and Digvijay’s cousin and the son of Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) leader Abhay Chautala, is the party nominee from the Rania seat. He has declared assets worth Rs 45.98 crore while listing “agriculture and business” as his sources of income. He owns a Hummer and with his wife, collectively owns 2.8 kg of gold worth Rs 2 crore and diamonds worth Rs 3.9 crore.
BJP’s Tosham candidate and former CM Bansi Lal’s granddaughter Shruti Choudhary, who recently crossed over from the Congress along with her mother Kiran, owns a BMW X1 and Mini Cooper along with her spouse. Together, the couple also owns 10.95 kg of gold, diamonds, and precious stones, besides 75 kg of silver, all worth Rs 10.09 crore. She has declared assets worth Rs 104.32 crore, of which Rs 44.11 crore are movable.
Union Minister Rao Inderjit Singh’s daughter Aarti has declared assets worth Rs 68.26 crore. The BJP’s Ateli candidate, Aarti has 1.9 kg of gold worth Rs 1.29 crore besides diamond jewellery worth Rs 10.69 lakh.
Aditya Surjewala, the son of Congress’ Rajya Sabha MP Randeep Singh Surjewala and party candidate from the family stronghold of Kaithal, has declared assets worth Rs 20.09 crore and owns gold and jewellery worth Rs 91.25 lakh along with his wife.

With “business” as his source of income and total assets worth Rs 6.96 crore, grandson of former CM Bhajan Lal, Bhavya Bishnoi does not own any vehicle but collectively with his wife, the BJP’s Adampur candidate owns 1.4 kg of gold worth Rs 1.05 crore.
Chander Mohan, the Congress’ Panchkula candidate and Bhajan Lal’s son, has declared assets worth Rs 80.47 crore and is the owner of a Mercedes Benz car. With sources of income as “social work, bank interest and pension”, the four-time MLA collectively owns 1.1 kg gold worth Rs 85 lakh with his wife.
Former Union Minister Birender Singh jumped ship from the BJP to the Congress along with his son Brijendra ahead of the Lok Sabha polls. Brijendra, a former MP from Hisar, is taking on Dushyant in Uchana Kalan. He and his wife have declared assets worth Rs 26.73 crore including a Toyota Fortuner Legender and an Innova Hycross, among other vehicles. The couple also owns gold and diamonds worth Rs 18.75 lakh and Congress’ Uchana Kalan candidate has listed his sources of income as “salary, rent, interest and capital gain”.
INLD nominee from Dabwali and former Deputy PM Devi Lal’s grandson Aditya Sihag has declared assets worth Rs 26.4 crore including gold and diamonds worth Rs 1.18 crore. Anirudh Chaudhary, a former treasurer of the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) and Bansi Lal’s grandson has assets worth Rs 21.33 crore including a Toyota Fortuner and Toyota Innova Hycross besides gold and diamond jewellery worth Rs 55.57 lakh. The Congress’s Tosham nominee has listed business, consultancy and directorship in companies as his source of income.

Abhay Singh Chautala, Devi Lal’s grandson and INLD’s Ellenabad candidate, who has declared assets worth Rs 61.01 crore, owns seven vehicles including two Toyota Land Cruisers, 2.9 kg gold worth Rs 2.07 crore and diamonds worth Rs 45 lakh. He has listed “agriculture and business” as his sources of income.
Former BJP minister-turned-rebel Ranjit Singh Chautala, who is contesting as an Independent from Rania, has declared total assets worth Rs 23.98 crore. Apart from the Ford Endeavor and Toyota Fortuner, Devi Lal’s son owns gold and diamonds worth Rs 61 lakh, four buffaloes and three cows. He has listed his source of income as “agriculture, salary and pension”.
==============================
Title:Arvind Kejriwal’s decision draws Delhi Congress flak: ‘Nautanki … do not want AAP to expand too much’
Date: 2024-09-16T07:38
Synopsys: “There is still a feeling in the Congress that Kejriwal is not to be trusted and hence, the party is cautious about him and AAP," says a Congress leader
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/arvind-kejriwal-decision-delhi-congress-flak-aap-9569952/
Content: 
While most INDIA bloc allies maintained that Arvind Kejriwal’s announcement of resignation was a decision of the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), the Delhi Chief Minister’s move brought to the fore the fissures between the Congress and the AAP. Kejriwal’s announcement came just days after talks over seat sharing between the two parties in Haryana didn’t work out, with the Congress sources saying that the AAP was “demanding too many seats”.
On Sunday, a section of Delhi Congress leaders termed Kejriwal’s announcement “nautanki (drama)”. “He is doing drama. He has no moral ground anymore. If he had any morality, he would have resigned earlier,” said Delhi Congress leader and former MP Sandeep Dikshit. Asked about the two Opposition parties being allies nationally, Dikshit said: “That is at the national level. But in Delhi, our fight is against Arvind Kejriwal.”
Echoing similar views, a senior Congress leader said the party does not want the AAP to expand too much. “They knew that an alliance in Haryana would have benefitted them. Hence, they wanted an alliance with us. But it didn’t work out. Now, for Delhi elections – whenever it happens – it will be difficult for the two parties to come together,” said the leader.

According to another party leader, Congress leader Bhupinder Singh Hooda opposed the alliance in Haryana. “While the central leadership may have some sympathy or may feel positively about the AAP, the state units are not inclined to ally with the party. The same thing happened in Haryana.”
“There is still a feeling in the Congress that Kejriwal is not to be trusted and hence, the party is cautious about him and AAP. He has announced that he will resign, but what is the motive? What impact will it have? We don’t know. Hence, we are waiting to see things pan out over the next few days,” said a senior Congress leader Sunday.
Notably, while several INDIA bloc parties welcomed Kejriwal’s bail on Friday, the Congress top leadership, including the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha Rahul Gandhi and party chief Mallikarjun Kharge, had maintained a strategic silence over the Supreme Court verdict. When asked about the court order, Congress spokesperson Supriya Shrinate had refused to “comment on it per se”. Instead, she highlighted how the “(central investigative) agencies have been misused against rivals in the past 10 years”.
The differences between the Congress and AAP notwithstanding, several other INDIA bloc parties reiterated that “central agencies were being misused by the government to target the Opposition”.

Trinamool Congress’s (TMC) Sagarika Ghose said the BJP, unable to handle electoral defeats, has tried every trick in the book to try and undermine and dislodge the AAP CM. “Kejriwal has consistently challenged and defeated the BJP in Delhi for the last decade. The BJP and the unelected Delhi LG have been interfering daily in the AAP government’s functioning and preventing an elected government from working,” she said.
Terming the resignation a “courageous step”, she said, “The BJP is repeatedly misusing central agencies like CBI and ED in a most disgraceful and unconstitutional manner to attack every opposition leader. Kejriwal has called the BJP’s bluff and shown that he remains one step ahead of the BJP”.
CPI’s D Raja shared similar views on the misuse of central agencies. However, he said the resignation is Kejriwal’s prerogative. “He will have to explain to the people why he is doing so because he is an elected person. That is between him, his party and the people.
They have not consulted INDIA bloc parties. It is their (AAP’s) independent decision. It is for the party to explain to the people what is their future course of action,” Raja said.

Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) MP Manoj Jha said there was a need to pay attention to what the court said while granting bail. “Apart from his statement (on resignation), there is a need to pay attention to that too. When Hemant Soren ji was released, what did the Supreme Court say? We need to pay attention to that. What did the court say when Arvind Kejriwal was granted bail? It is important to note what the court. It is important to see that through these institutions, the political game is being played by the BJP. I feel there will be a full stop to it. There will be an end to political vendetta started by two people in the last 10 years,” he said.
==============================
Title:Ding Liren on Gukesh: ‘He is playing extremely well, he is a favourite to win World Chess title’
Date: 2024-09-16T12:16
Synopsys: World Champion Ding Liren says his challenger D Gukesh can be considered as favourite to win the world chess title to be played in November.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/chess/chess-olympiad-2024-ding-liren-tips-gukesh-to-win-world-chess-title-9570405/
Content: 
Defending champion Ding Liren has tipped his teenage challenger D Gukesh “favourite” to win the FIDE World Chess Championship final, which will be held in Singapore later this year
The duo are currently competing in the 45th Chess Olympiad in Budapest.
“I can see my opponent (Gukesh) playing extremely well in this tournament. Maybe he is a favourite in the World Championship Match. He also has a higher rating than me,” Liren said in an interaction with the International Chess Federation (FIDE) in the mixed zone.

“I have dropped a lot since last year, but I will fight my best to try to overcome the rating difference,” he added in a rather candid admission.
Liren, 31 is the highest rated chess player of all time and won the world crown in May last year after defeating Russian GM Ian Nepomniachtchi.
World Champion Ding Liren contemplates his next move during a Norway Chess match. (PHOTO via Stev Bonhage/Norway Chess)
Liren took a break from the game after that, owing to his battle with depression. Liren returned to action earlier this year at the Tata Steel Chess Tournament, finishing ninth in the event.
Meanwhile, on the other hand, two years after heartbreak at his home in Chennai, Gukesh has arrived at the Olympiad in Hungary’s capital like a man who has unfinished business. In the four games he has played so far at the Olympiad in Budapest after sitting out the first round, he’s accounted for four strong grandmasters — Vignir Vatnar Stefansson (Iceland), Adam Kozak (Hungary), Alexandr Predke (Serbia) and finally Aydin Suleymanli (Azerbaijan) — with an average rating of over 2600.

On Sunday, he claimed his fastest win at the 2024 Olympiad rather than the slow death that he has delivered to other opponents.
Gukesh won the Candidates tournament in April to become the youngest challenger to the world title at the age of 17. He turned 18 in May.
Liren and Gukesh will clash in Singapore from November 20 to December 15 for the coveted title and a prize fund of USD 2.50 million.
==============================
Title:Ahead of India vs Bangladesh Test series, here a look at WTC scenarios
Date: 2024-09-16T11:06
Synopsys: WTC scenarios: India favourites to play final again, Bazball's chance takes a hit, Australia, New Zealand and Sri Lanka stay in the hunt.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/ahead-of-india-vs-bangladesh-test-series-here-a-look-at-wtc-scenarios-9570265/
Content: 
Rohit Sharma-led India are favourites to make it into the final of the World Test Championship again, which is scheduled to be played at Lord’s from June 11, 2025.
India, who have lost the previous two WTC finals are currently sitting on top of the points table with home matches to play against Bangladesh and New Zealand, starting from September 19.
Indian will then travel to Australia, who are currently placed in second position, and will play a five-match Border Gavaskar Test series, which most likely will give us the finalists for the third final.

The defending champions Australia also have an away series of two Tests in Sri Lanka.
Sri Lanka can be the dark horse in the WTC final race. Sri Lanka after defeating England in the third Test will have a big chance to give it a shot. Sri Lanka can finish in the top if they manage to win their two home series against New Zealand and Australia. The Dhananjaya de Silva-led team have an away series against South Africa as well.
New Zealand the inaugural WTC champions are currently placed at third place. They will be playing eight WTC matches in the span of the next two-and-half months. Out of those eight, five will be played in the sub-continent against Sri Lanka and India, respectively.
Interestingly, England’s chances to make it to the final has taken a hit after their unexpected defeat at The Oval against Sri Lanka.

World Test Championship (2023-25)
Position Teams Matches Points Per cent Reaming matches
1 India 9 74 68.5 BAN -2 (H), NZ – 3(H), AUS – 5 (A)
2 Australia 12 90 62.5 IND – 5 (H), SL -2 (A)
3 New Zealand 6 36 50.0 SL -2 (A), IND – 3(A), ENG – 3 (H)
4 Bangladesh 6 33 45.8 IND – 2 (A), WI – 2 (A), SA – 2 (H)
5 Sri Lanka 7 36 42.9 NZ – 2(H), SA – 2 (A), AUS – 2 (H)
6 England 16 81 42.2 PAK – 3 (A), NZ – 3 (A)
7 South Africa 6 28 38.9 SL – 2(H), PAK – 2(H), BAN – 2 (A)
8 Pakistan 7 16 19.1 ENG – 3 (H), SA – 2 (A), WI – 2 (H)
9 West Indies 9 20 18.5 BAN – 2(H), PAK – 2 (A)
==============================
Title:Aakash Chopra recalls when current Team India head coach Gautam Gambhir fought with a truck driver
Date: 2024-09-16T09:49
Synopsys: Aakash Chopra says Gautam Gambhir always wore his heart on the sleeve but also calls him a 'short-fused.'
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/aakash-chopra-team-india-head-coach-gautam-gambhir-fought-with-truck-driver-9570157/
Content: 
Former and Delhi opener Aakash Chopra recollected an incident when his former teammate and current Team India head coach Gautam Gambhir fought with a truck driver.
“Gautam is someone who once fought with a truck driver in Delhi,” Chopra said in a podcast with Raj Shamani.
“He got out of his car and climb the truck to grab the collar of the driver because he made a wrong turn and was abusing. I was like, ‘Gauti, what are you doing?’ So that’s made him Gautam.”

Chopra said although Gambhir was a very hardworking cricketer but also called him “short-fused” when it comes to the temperament.
“Passionate guy. Very hardworking when it comes to his craft,” said Chopra.
“A bit serious but scored a lot of runs. He always wore his heart on the sleeve.
“Temperament wise he can be very short-fused. But everyone has a different character.”

A gritty left-handed opener, who was once ranked the best Test batsman, Gambhir has tasted success both as a captain and mentor in IPL.
Gautam Gambhir has had a history of confrontation and conflict with some of the cricketers – the name of Virat Kohli comes to mind – and Gambhir would do well to keep his personal likes and dislikes aside while guiding the Indian team.
Gautam Gambhir is taking up the job when Indian cricket is in a bullish mood, having just won the T20 World Cup. But the atmosphere will not take much time to take a turn if initial results in his tenure don’t go as desired. This is where the head coach needs to keep calm and keep the team in a good headspace.
==============================
Title:Congress gets chairs for 3 committees in Lok Sabha, 1 in Rajya Sabha
Date: 2024-09-16T11:35
Synopsys: Highly placed sources told The Indian Express that in the Lok Sabha, the Congress will get chairs for the External Affairs Standing Committee, Standing Committee on Agriculture and the Standing Committee on Rural Development.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/parliament-standing-committees-congress-chairs-lok-sabha-rajya-sabha-9570312/
Content: 
The negotiations for the Parliamentary Standing Committees between the government and the Opposition are over, with the Congress having managed to get chairs for three committees in the Lok Sabha and one in the Rajya Sabha.
Highly placed sources told The Indian Express that in the Lok Sabha, the Congress will get chairs for the External Affairs Standing Committee, Standing Committee on Agriculture and the Standing Committee on Rural Development. In the Rajya Sabha, the Opposition party will get the Standing Committee for Education.
Negotiations between the government and the Opposition parties had been ongoing over the committees for a couple of months.

The Congress had sought chairs for five Parliamentary Standing Committees — four of Lok Sabha and one of Rajya Sabha. One chair each is also likely to be granted to INDIA partners the Samajwadi Party, DMK, and AITC. For the one chair in the Rajya Sabha committees, the Congress had sought the crucial Committee on Home Affairs.
Several rounds of meetings between the government representatives and Opposition members took place before the government decided to allocate the standing committee chairs to the Opposition. The meetings were attended by Parliamentary Affairs Minister Kiren Rijiju, and Union Minister of State for Law and Justice and Parliamentary Affairs Arjun Ram Meghwal. The Congress was represented by Deputy Leader in the Lok Sabha Gaurav Gogoi, and chief whips of the parties Kodikunnil Suresh and Hairam Ramesh.
On August 16, five standing committees of Parliament were constituted, with Congress MP and general secretary in charge (organisation) K C Venugopal being named as the chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts. The post of chair of the Committee on Public Accounts as per convention is given to the Opposition.
Also Read | India’s Parliamentary Committee System: Unveiling its origin, significance and challenges
The other committees constituted were the Committee on Welfare of Other Backward Classes, which will be headed by Ganesh Singh (BJP), Committee of Estimates, which will be headed by Sanjay Jaiswal (BJP), Committee on Public Undertakings, which will be headed by Baijayant Panda (BJP), and the Committee on Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, which will be headed by Faggan Singh Kulaste (BJP).

On August 27, All India Trinamool Congress MP Derek O’Brien had written to Leader of the House in Rajya Sabha J P Nadda over the delay in the re-constitution of department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees (DPSCs). In his letter, O’Brien said that the delay in the constitution of the committees has profound implications for the democratic process and the quality of legislation enacted.
In the last Lok Sabha term, when the Congress had 53 members, the party had the chairmanship of just one committee. This time, the Congress has 99 members in the Lok Sabha while other Opposition parties like the Samajwadi Party (37), TMC (29), and DMK (22) have considerable numbers in the Lok Sabha. These parties are also expected to get some representation in the House committees.
==============================
Title:Swanky cars to jewellery worth crores, what Haryana’s political dynasts have declared in poll affidavits
Date: 2024-09-16T07:38
Synopsys: While Dushyant Chautala owns a Toyota Fortuner, his brother Digvijay owns a Range Rover, BJP’s Shruti Choudhary owns a BMW X1 and Mini Cooper along with her spouse
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/what-haryana-political-dynasts-have-declared-in-poll-affidavits-9569977/
Content: 
Several of the political dynasts contesting the October 5 Haryana Assembly elections own swanky cars and gold and silver worth crores, their election affidavits show.
The richest among these dynasts is former Deputy Chief Minister and Jannayak Janta Party (JJP) chief Dushyant Chautala, who is contesting from Uchana Kalan. He has declared assets worth Rs 122.48 crore – Rs 44.03 crore movable and Rs 78.54 crore immovable – with sources of income listed in his poll affidavit as “agriculture, salary and business”. While Dushyant owns a Toyota Fortuner, he and his wife collectively own 5.6 kg of gold worth Rs 4.14 crore and diamonds worth Rs 2.63 crore.
The JJP chief’s brother Digvijay and the party’s candidate from Dabwali, along with his spouse, has declared assets worth Rs 102.17 crore. While he owns a Range Rover, the couple owns 4.6 kg of gold worth Rs 3.4 crore and diamonds worth Rs 1.96 crore. Digvijay, like his brother, has also listed “agriculture, salary and business” as his sources of income.

Arjun, Dushyant and Digvijay’s cousin and the son of Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) leader Abhay Chautala, is the party nominee from the Rania seat. He has declared assets worth Rs 45.98 crore while listing “agriculture and business” as his sources of income. He owns a Hummer and with his wife, collectively owns 2.8 kg of gold worth Rs 2 crore and diamonds worth Rs 3.9 crore.
BJP’s Tosham candidate and former CM Bansi Lal’s granddaughter Shruti Choudhary, who recently crossed over from the Congress along with her mother Kiran, owns a BMW X1 and Mini Cooper along with her spouse. Together, the couple also owns 10.95 kg of gold, diamonds, and precious stones, besides 75 kg of silver, all worth Rs 10.09 crore. She has declared assets worth Rs 104.32 crore, of which Rs 44.11 crore are movable.
Union Minister Rao Inderjit Singh’s daughter Aarti has declared assets worth Rs 68.26 crore. The BJP’s Ateli candidate, Aarti has 1.9 kg of gold worth Rs 1.29 crore besides diamond jewellery worth Rs 10.69 lakh.
Aditya Surjewala, the son of Congress’ Rajya Sabha MP Randeep Singh Surjewala and party candidate from the family stronghold of Kaithal, has declared assets worth Rs 20.09 crore and owns gold and jewellery worth Rs 91.25 lakh along with his wife.

With “business” as his source of income and total assets worth Rs 6.96 crore, grandson of former CM Bhajan Lal, Bhavya Bishnoi does not own any vehicle but collectively with his wife, the BJP’s Adampur candidate owns 1.4 kg of gold worth Rs 1.05 crore.
Chander Mohan, the Congress’ Panchkula candidate and Bhajan Lal’s son, has declared assets worth Rs 80.47 crore and is the owner of a Mercedes Benz car. With sources of income as “social work, bank interest and pension”, the four-time MLA collectively owns 1.1 kg gold worth Rs 85 lakh with his wife.
Former Union Minister Birender Singh jumped ship from the BJP to the Congress along with his son Brijendra ahead of the Lok Sabha polls. Brijendra, a former MP from Hisar, is taking on Dushyant in Uchana Kalan. He and his wife have declared assets worth Rs 26.73 crore including a Toyota Fortuner Legender and an Innova Hycross, among other vehicles. The couple also owns gold and diamonds worth Rs 18.75 lakh and Congress’ Uchana Kalan candidate has listed his sources of income as “salary, rent, interest and capital gain”.
INLD nominee from Dabwali and former Deputy PM Devi Lal’s grandson Aditya Sihag has declared assets worth Rs 26.4 crore including gold and diamonds worth Rs 1.18 crore. Anirudh Chaudhary, a former treasurer of the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) and Bansi Lal’s grandson has assets worth Rs 21.33 crore including a Toyota Fortuner and Toyota Innova Hycross besides gold and diamond jewellery worth Rs 55.57 lakh. The Congress’s Tosham nominee has listed business, consultancy and directorship in companies as his source of income.

Abhay Singh Chautala, Devi Lal’s grandson and INLD’s Ellenabad candidate, who has declared assets worth Rs 61.01 crore, owns seven vehicles including two Toyota Land Cruisers, 2.9 kg gold worth Rs 2.07 crore and diamonds worth Rs 45 lakh. He has listed “agriculture and business” as his sources of income.
Former BJP minister-turned-rebel Ranjit Singh Chautala, who is contesting as an Independent from Rania, has declared total assets worth Rs 23.98 crore. Apart from the Ford Endeavor and Toyota Fortuner, Devi Lal’s son owns gold and diamonds worth Rs 61 lakh, four buffaloes and three cows. He has listed his source of income as “agriculture, salary and pension”.
==============================
Title:Arvind Kejriwal’s decision draws Delhi Congress flak: ‘Nautanki … do not want AAP to expand too much’
Date: 2024-09-16T07:38
Synopsys: “There is still a feeling in the Congress that Kejriwal is not to be trusted and hence, the party is cautious about him and AAP," says a Congress leader
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/arvind-kejriwal-decision-delhi-congress-flak-aap-9569952/
Content: 
While most INDIA bloc allies maintained that Arvind Kejriwal’s announcement of resignation was a decision of the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), the Delhi Chief Minister’s move brought to the fore the fissures between the Congress and the AAP. Kejriwal’s announcement came just days after talks over seat sharing between the two parties in Haryana didn’t work out, with the Congress sources saying that the AAP was “demanding too many seats”.
On Sunday, a section of Delhi Congress leaders termed Kejriwal’s announcement “nautanki (drama)”. “He is doing drama. He has no moral ground anymore. If he had any morality, he would have resigned earlier,” said Delhi Congress leader and former MP Sandeep Dikshit. Asked about the two Opposition parties being allies nationally, Dikshit said: “That is at the national level. But in Delhi, our fight is against Arvind Kejriwal.”
Echoing similar views, a senior Congress leader said the party does not want the AAP to expand too much. “They knew that an alliance in Haryana would have benefitted them. Hence, they wanted an alliance with us. But it didn’t work out. Now, for Delhi elections – whenever it happens – it will be difficult for the two parties to come together,” said the leader.

According to another party leader, Congress leader Bhupinder Singh Hooda opposed the alliance in Haryana. “While the central leadership may have some sympathy or may feel positively about the AAP, the state units are not inclined to ally with the party. The same thing happened in Haryana.”
“There is still a feeling in the Congress that Kejriwal is not to be trusted and hence, the party is cautious about him and AAP. He has announced that he will resign, but what is the motive? What impact will it have? We don’t know. Hence, we are waiting to see things pan out over the next few days,” said a senior Congress leader Sunday.
Notably, while several INDIA bloc parties welcomed Kejriwal’s bail on Friday, the Congress top leadership, including the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha Rahul Gandhi and party chief Mallikarjun Kharge, had maintained a strategic silence over the Supreme Court verdict. When asked about the court order, Congress spokesperson Supriya Shrinate had refused to “comment on it per se”. Instead, she highlighted how the “(central investigative) agencies have been misused against rivals in the past 10 years”.
The differences between the Congress and AAP notwithstanding, several other INDIA bloc parties reiterated that “central agencies were being misused by the government to target the Opposition”.

Trinamool Congress’s (TMC) Sagarika Ghose said the BJP, unable to handle electoral defeats, has tried every trick in the book to try and undermine and dislodge the AAP CM. “Kejriwal has consistently challenged and defeated the BJP in Delhi for the last decade. The BJP and the unelected Delhi LG have been interfering daily in the AAP government’s functioning and preventing an elected government from working,” she said.
Terming the resignation a “courageous step”, she said, “The BJP is repeatedly misusing central agencies like CBI and ED in a most disgraceful and unconstitutional manner to attack every opposition leader. Kejriwal has called the BJP’s bluff and shown that he remains one step ahead of the BJP”.
CPI’s D Raja shared similar views on the misuse of central agencies. However, he said the resignation is Kejriwal’s prerogative. “He will have to explain to the people why he is doing so because he is an elected person. That is between him, his party and the people.
They have not consulted INDIA bloc parties. It is their (AAP’s) independent decision. It is for the party to explain to the people what is their future course of action,” Raja said.

Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) MP Manoj Jha said there was a need to pay attention to what the court said while granting bail. “Apart from his statement (on resignation), there is a need to pay attention to that too. When Hemant Soren ji was released, what did the Supreme Court say? We need to pay attention to that. What did the court say when Arvind Kejriwal was granted bail? It is important to note what the court. It is important to see that through these institutions, the political game is being played by the BJP. I feel there will be a full stop to it. There will be an end to political vendetta started by two people in the last 10 years,” he said.
==============================
Title:Ding Liren on Gukesh: ‘He is playing extremely well, he is a favourite to win World Chess title’
Date: 2024-09-16T12:16
Synopsys: World Champion Ding Liren says his challenger D Gukesh can be considered as favourite to win the world chess title to be played in November.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/chess/chess-olympiad-2024-ding-liren-tips-gukesh-to-win-world-chess-title-9570405/
Content: 
Defending champion Ding Liren has tipped his teenage challenger D Gukesh “favourite” to win the FIDE World Chess Championship final, which will be held in Singapore later this year
The duo are currently competing in the 45th Chess Olympiad in Budapest.
“I can see my opponent (Gukesh) playing extremely well in this tournament. Maybe he is a favourite in the World Championship Match. He also has a higher rating than me,” Liren said in an interaction with the International Chess Federation (FIDE) in the mixed zone.

“I have dropped a lot since last year, but I will fight my best to try to overcome the rating difference,” he added in a rather candid admission.
Liren, 31 is the highest rated chess player of all time and won the world crown in May last year after defeating Russian GM Ian Nepomniachtchi.
World Champion Ding Liren contemplates his next move during a Norway Chess match. (PHOTO via Stev Bonhage/Norway Chess)
Liren took a break from the game after that, owing to his battle with depression. Liren returned to action earlier this year at the Tata Steel Chess Tournament, finishing ninth in the event.
Meanwhile, on the other hand, two years after heartbreak at his home in Chennai, Gukesh has arrived at the Olympiad in Hungary’s capital like a man who has unfinished business. In the four games he has played so far at the Olympiad in Budapest after sitting out the first round, he’s accounted for four strong grandmasters — Vignir Vatnar Stefansson (Iceland), Adam Kozak (Hungary), Alexandr Predke (Serbia) and finally Aydin Suleymanli (Azerbaijan) — with an average rating of over 2600.

On Sunday, he claimed his fastest win at the 2024 Olympiad rather than the slow death that he has delivered to other opponents.
Gukesh won the Candidates tournament in April to become the youngest challenger to the world title at the age of 17. He turned 18 in May.
Liren and Gukesh will clash in Singapore from November 20 to December 15 for the coveted title and a prize fund of USD 2.50 million.
==============================
Title:Ahead of India vs Bangladesh Test series, here a look at WTC scenarios
Date: 2024-09-16T11:06
Synopsys: WTC scenarios: India favourites to play final again, Bazball's chance takes a hit, Australia, New Zealand and Sri Lanka stay in the hunt.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/ahead-of-india-vs-bangladesh-test-series-here-a-look-at-wtc-scenarios-9570265/
Content: 
Rohit Sharma-led India are favourites to make it into the final of the World Test Championship again, which is scheduled to be played at Lord’s from June 11, 2025.
India, who have lost the previous two WTC finals are currently sitting on top of the points table with home matches to play against Bangladesh and New Zealand, starting from September 19.
Indian will then travel to Australia, who are currently placed in second position, and will play a five-match Border Gavaskar Test series, which most likely will give us the finalists for the third final.

The defending champions Australia also have an away series of two Tests in Sri Lanka.
Sri Lanka can be the dark horse in the WTC final race. Sri Lanka after defeating England in the third Test will have a big chance to give it a shot. Sri Lanka can finish in the top if they manage to win their two home series against New Zealand and Australia. The Dhananjaya de Silva-led team have an away series against South Africa as well.
New Zealand the inaugural WTC champions are currently placed at third place. They will be playing eight WTC matches in the span of the next two-and-half months. Out of those eight, five will be played in the sub-continent against Sri Lanka and India, respectively.
Interestingly, England’s chances to make it to the final has taken a hit after their unexpected defeat at The Oval against Sri Lanka.

World Test Championship (2023-25)
Position Teams Matches Points Per cent Reaming matches
1 India 9 74 68.5 BAN -2 (H), NZ – 3(H), AUS – 5 (A)
2 Australia 12 90 62.5 IND – 5 (H), SL -2 (A)
3 New Zealand 6 36 50.0 SL -2 (A), IND – 3(A), ENG – 3 (H)
4 Bangladesh 6 33 45.8 IND – 2 (A), WI – 2 (A), SA – 2 (H)
5 Sri Lanka 7 36 42.9 NZ – 2(H), SA – 2 (A), AUS – 2 (H)
6 England 16 81 42.2 PAK – 3 (A), NZ – 3 (A)
7 South Africa 6 28 38.9 SL – 2(H), PAK – 2(H), BAN – 2 (A)
8 Pakistan 7 16 19.1 ENG – 3 (H), SA – 2 (A), WI – 2 (H)
9 West Indies 9 20 18.5 BAN – 2(H), PAK – 2 (A)
==============================
Title:Aakash Chopra recalls when current Team India head coach Gautam Gambhir fought with a truck driver
Date: 2024-09-16T09:49
Synopsys: Aakash Chopra says Gautam Gambhir always wore his heart on the sleeve but also calls him a 'short-fused.'
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/aakash-chopra-team-india-head-coach-gautam-gambhir-fought-with-truck-driver-9570157/
Content: 
Former and Delhi opener Aakash Chopra recollected an incident when his former teammate and current Team India head coach Gautam Gambhir fought with a truck driver.
“Gautam is someone who once fought with a truck driver in Delhi,” Chopra said in a podcast with Raj Shamani.
“He got out of his car and climb the truck to grab the collar of the driver because he made a wrong turn and was abusing. I was like, ‘Gauti, what are you doing?’ So that’s made him Gautam.”

Chopra said although Gambhir was a very hardworking cricketer but also called him “short-fused” when it comes to the temperament.
“Passionate guy. Very hardworking when it comes to his craft,” said Chopra.
“A bit serious but scored a lot of runs. He always wore his heart on the sleeve.
“Temperament wise he can be very short-fused. But everyone has a different character.”

A gritty left-handed opener, who was once ranked the best Test batsman, Gambhir has tasted success both as a captain and mentor in IPL.
Gautam Gambhir has had a history of confrontation and conflict with some of the cricketers – the name of Virat Kohli comes to mind – and Gambhir would do well to keep his personal likes and dislikes aside while guiding the Indian team.
Gautam Gambhir is taking up the job when Indian cricket is in a bullish mood, having just won the T20 World Cup. But the atmosphere will not take much time to take a turn if initial results in his tenure don’t go as desired. This is where the head coach needs to keep calm and keep the team in a good headspace.
==============================
