Title:Lonely in J&K fray, Ghulam Nabi Azad battles ‘BJP proxy’ tag amid his party’s flailing campaign
Date: 2024-09-16T14:00
Synopsys: Struggling to keep DPAP afloat, Azad’s best hope is that some of its key faces, such as Wani in Doda seat, manage to win so that he has a stake in govt formation
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/jammu-kashmir-ghulam-nabi-azad-bjp-proxy-tag-party-campaign-9570608/
Content: 
It is around 10.30 am on Sunday. A handful of the Democratic Progressive Azad Party (DPAP)’s supporters are waiting for party chief Ghulam Nabi Azad at Thathri, a bustling market on the Batote-Kishtwar highway 30 km from Doda in the Jammu region. Some DPAP workers, though excited about Azad’s arrival, are upset over the party’s “lukewarm” campaign for the upcoming J&K Assembly polls.
The DPAP candidate in this area, which falls in the Doda Assembly constituency, is former minister Abdul Majid Wani, a former Congress leader who had won the seat in 2002 and 2008. Azad is campaigning for him for the first time. That too just a day ahead of the end of campaigning for the first phase of polls on September 18.
The party which Azad formed in September 2022 amid fanfare after leaving the Congress, has had faced a steady exodus of leaders. Although several prominent Congress faces had initially joined Azad’s party, they deserted him, one after another.

Political Pulse | Decoding Ghulam Nabi Azad play: Warming up to BJP to mixed messages on Article 370, UCC
The highway from Doda to Thathri is in a shambles because of the ongoing road-widening work. While the flags of the BJP and the National Conference (NC) are seen adorning various shops and vehicles en route, one has to look hard to spot the DPAP’s posters, banners or flags.
Azad is struggling to keep his party afloat. A fresh wave of its leaders’ desertion took place after the DPAP’s rout in the recent Lok Sabha elections with both its candidates — in the Anantnag-Rajouri and Udhampur seats — losing even their security deposits.
Azad’s sudden announcement late last month that he was “unwell” and may not campaign for his candidates threw the party out of gear. Four of his party candidates withdrew their nomination papers, who were from Jammu’s Chenab valley, which Azad considers his stronghold. It has three districts — Kishtwar, Doda and Ramban. Azad now does not have a candidate even in Bhaderwah — his home town that he had represented as an MLA when he was the J&K chief minister from 2006 to 2008.
After a two-hour wait, Azad’s cavalcade along with several vehicles with party workers arrive. The crowd swells, blocking the narrow road. Azad emerges out of his car’s sunroof. Sporting a white beard, the veteran looks different, even a bit tired. He addresses the workers, asking them to remain vigilant against communal politics. He recounts the development works and welfare measures undertaken during his chief ministerial tenure. He also makes some promises like free ration and free electricity for the poor.

The DPAP camp says the party’s candidates are in the fray in some 19 seats, mostly in the Jammu region, out of 90 seats. Azad, who was in the thick of national politics for decades, is in a way facing a “splendid isolation”. The major regional parties, the Farooq Abdullah-led NC and the Mehbooba Mufti-led PDP, have stayed away from him, believing that he is a “proxy for BJP”. He has campaigned for just five days in Anantnag and Doda districts.
Azad’s best hope is that some of his party’s prominent faces like Wani manage to win so that he has a stake in the post-poll government formation exercise. Talking to The Indian Express, he predicts a hung Assembly, arguing that no party or alliance would get a majority. But he refuses to get drawn into the issues related to national politics or the electoral dynamics shaping up in J&K.
He speaks about his commitment to the Chenab valley but reiterates his pledge to introduce a legislation in the Assembly to prevent outsiders from buying land or securing jobs in J&K. Asked how he can make such promises when his party is not even contesting in one-third of the seats, he merely says, “Wait and watch.”
More than his health issues, Azad seems to be grappling with the “BJP proxy” tag. His workers would not believe in any such “propaganda” but admit the party’s campaign has been lacklustre. “We have always stood with him (Azad). Wani sahab too is popular. Had Azad sahab campaigned extensively, it would have been easier for us to win the seat. But we will still win,” says a DPAP worker.

In the 2014 elections, the BJP had won the Doda seat with the then Congress candidate Wani finishing as the runner-up. Azad’s political career, although at its fag end, now depends on his party picking up a couple of seats, which would then give him a political leverage in the post-poll scenario. And all his hopes are pinned on the Chenab valley. With a wave of his hand, he rubbishes reports that he could return to the Congress.
Azad’s cavalcade moves ahead through the market on its way to Kahra where he addresses a meeting attended by a sizeable crowd.
==============================
Title:Congress gets chairs for 3 committees in Lok Sabha, 1 in Rajya Sabha
Date: 2024-09-16T11:35
Synopsys: Highly placed sources told The Indian Express that in the Lok Sabha, the Congress will get chairs for the External Affairs Standing Committee, Standing Committee on Agriculture and the Standing Committee on Rural Development.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/parliament-standing-committees-congress-chairs-lok-sabha-rajya-sabha-9570312/
Content: 
The negotiations for the Parliamentary Standing Committees between the government and the Opposition are over, with the Congress having managed to get chairs for three committees in the Lok Sabha and one in the Rajya Sabha.
Highly placed sources told The Indian Express that in the Lok Sabha, the Congress will get chairs for the External Affairs Standing Committee, Standing Committee on Agriculture and the Standing Committee on Rural Development. In the Rajya Sabha, the Opposition party will get the Standing Committee for Education.
Negotiations between the government and the Opposition parties had been ongoing over the committees for a couple of months.

The Congress had sought chairs for five Parliamentary Standing Committees — four of Lok Sabha and one of Rajya Sabha. One chair each is also likely to be granted to INDIA partners the Samajwadi Party, DMK, and AITC. For the one chair in the Rajya Sabha committees, the Congress had sought the crucial Committee on Home Affairs.
Several rounds of meetings between the government representatives and Opposition members took place before the government decided to allocate the standing committee chairs to the Opposition. The meetings were attended by Parliamentary Affairs Minister Kiren Rijiju, and Union Minister of State for Law and Justice and Parliamentary Affairs Arjun Ram Meghwal. The Congress was represented by Deputy Leader in the Lok Sabha Gaurav Gogoi, and chief whips of the parties Kodikunnil Suresh and Hairam Ramesh.
On August 16, five standing committees of Parliament were constituted, with Congress MP and general secretary in charge (organisation) K C Venugopal being named as the chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts. The post of chair of the Committee on Public Accounts as per convention is given to the Opposition.
Also Read | India’s Parliamentary Committee System: Unveiling its origin, significance and challenges
The other committees constituted were the Committee on Welfare of Other Backward Classes, which will be headed by Ganesh Singh (BJP), Committee of Estimates, which will be headed by Sanjay Jaiswal (BJP), Committee on Public Undertakings, which will be headed by Baijayant Panda (BJP), and the Committee on Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, which will be headed by Faggan Singh Kulaste (BJP).

On August 27, All India Trinamool Congress MP Derek O’Brien had written to Leader of the House in Rajya Sabha J P Nadda over the delay in the re-constitution of department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees (DPSCs). In his letter, O’Brien said that the delay in the constitution of the committees has profound implications for the democratic process and the quality of legislation enacted.
In the last Lok Sabha term, when the Congress had 53 members, the party had the chairmanship of just one committee. This time, the Congress has 99 members in the Lok Sabha while other Opposition parties like the Samajwadi Party (37), TMC (29), and DMK (22) have considerable numbers in the Lok Sabha. These parties are also expected to get some representation in the House committees.
==============================
Title:Swanky cars to jewellery worth crores, what Haryana’s political dynasts have declared in poll affidavits
Date: 2024-09-16T07:38
Synopsys: While Dushyant Chautala owns a Toyota Fortuner, his brother Digvijay owns a Range Rover, BJP’s Shruti Choudhary owns a BMW X1 and Mini Cooper along with her spouse
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/what-haryana-political-dynasts-have-declared-in-poll-affidavits-9569977/
Content: 
Several of the political dynasts contesting the October 5 Haryana Assembly elections own swanky cars and gold and silver worth crores, their election affidavits show.
The richest among these dynasts is former Deputy Chief Minister and Jannayak Janta Party (JJP) chief Dushyant Chautala, who is contesting from Uchana Kalan. He has declared assets worth Rs 122.48 crore – Rs 44.03 crore movable and Rs 78.54 crore immovable – with sources of income listed in his poll affidavit as “agriculture, salary and business”. While Dushyant owns a Toyota Fortuner, he and his wife collectively own 5.6 kg of gold worth Rs 4.14 crore and diamonds worth Rs 2.63 crore.
The JJP chief’s brother Digvijay and the party’s candidate from Dabwali, along with his spouse, has declared assets worth Rs 102.17 crore. While he owns a Range Rover, the couple owns 4.6 kg of gold worth Rs 3.4 crore and diamonds worth Rs 1.96 crore. Digvijay, like his brother, has also listed “agriculture, salary and business” as his sources of income.

Arjun, Dushyant and Digvijay’s cousin and the son of Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) leader Abhay Chautala, is the party nominee from the Rania seat. He has declared assets worth Rs 45.98 crore while listing “agriculture and business” as his sources of income. He owns a Hummer and with his wife, collectively owns 2.8 kg of gold worth Rs 2 crore and diamonds worth Rs 3.9 crore.
BJP’s Tosham candidate and former CM Bansi Lal’s granddaughter Shruti Choudhary, who recently crossed over from the Congress along with her mother Kiran, owns a BMW X1 and Mini Cooper along with her spouse. Together, the couple also owns 10.95 kg of gold, diamonds, and precious stones, besides 75 kg of silver, all worth Rs 10.09 crore. She has declared assets worth Rs 104.32 crore, of which Rs 44.11 crore are movable.
Union Minister Rao Inderjit Singh’s daughter Aarti has declared assets worth Rs 68.26 crore. The BJP’s Ateli candidate, Aarti has 1.9 kg of gold worth Rs 1.29 crore besides diamond jewellery worth Rs 10.69 lakh.
Aditya Surjewala, the son of Congress’ Rajya Sabha MP Randeep Singh Surjewala and party candidate from the family stronghold of Kaithal, has declared assets worth Rs 20.09 crore and owns gold and jewellery worth Rs 91.25 lakh along with his wife.

With “business” as his source of income and total assets worth Rs 6.96 crore, grandson of former CM Bhajan Lal, Bhavya Bishnoi does not own any vehicle but collectively with his wife, the BJP’s Adampur candidate owns 1.4 kg of gold worth Rs 1.05 crore.
Chander Mohan, the Congress’ Panchkula candidate and Bhajan Lal’s son, has declared assets worth Rs 80.47 crore and is the owner of a Mercedes Benz car. With sources of income as “social work, bank interest and pension”, the four-time MLA collectively owns 1.1 kg gold worth Rs 85 lakh with his wife.
Former Union Minister Birender Singh jumped ship from the BJP to the Congress along with his son Brijendra ahead of the Lok Sabha polls. Brijendra, a former MP from Hisar, is taking on Dushyant in Uchana Kalan. He and his wife have declared assets worth Rs 26.73 crore including a Toyota Fortuner Legender and an Innova Hycross, among other vehicles. The couple also owns gold and diamonds worth Rs 18.75 lakh and Congress’ Uchana Kalan candidate has listed his sources of income as “salary, rent, interest and capital gain”.
INLD nominee from Dabwali and former Deputy PM Devi Lal’s grandson Aditya Sihag has declared assets worth Rs 26.4 crore including gold and diamonds worth Rs 1.18 crore. Anirudh Chaudhary, a former treasurer of the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) and Bansi Lal’s grandson has assets worth Rs 21.33 crore including a Toyota Fortuner and Toyota Innova Hycross besides gold and diamond jewellery worth Rs 55.57 lakh. The Congress’s Tosham nominee has listed business, consultancy and directorship in companies as his source of income.

Abhay Singh Chautala, Devi Lal’s grandson and INLD’s Ellenabad candidate, who has declared assets worth Rs 61.01 crore, owns seven vehicles including two Toyota Land Cruisers, 2.9 kg gold worth Rs 2.07 crore and diamonds worth Rs 45 lakh. He has listed “agriculture and business” as his sources of income.
Former BJP minister-turned-rebel Ranjit Singh Chautala, who is contesting as an Independent from Rania, has declared total assets worth Rs 23.98 crore. Apart from the Ford Endeavor and Toyota Fortuner, Devi Lal’s son owns gold and diamonds worth Rs 61 lakh, four buffaloes and three cows. He has listed his source of income as “agriculture, salary and pension”.
==============================
Title:Arvind Kejriwal’s decision draws Delhi Congress flak: ‘Nautanki … do not want AAP to expand too much’
Date: 2024-09-16T07:38
Synopsys: “There is still a feeling in the Congress that Kejriwal is not to be trusted and hence, the party is cautious about him and AAP," says a Congress leader
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/arvind-kejriwal-decision-delhi-congress-flak-aap-9569952/
Content: 
While most INDIA bloc allies maintained that Arvind Kejriwal’s announcement of resignation was a decision of the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), the Delhi Chief Minister’s move brought to the fore the fissures between the Congress and the AAP. Kejriwal’s announcement came just days after talks over seat sharing between the two parties in Haryana didn’t work out, with the Congress sources saying that the AAP was “demanding too many seats”.
On Sunday, a section of Delhi Congress leaders termed Kejriwal’s announcement “nautanki (drama)”. “He is doing drama. He has no moral ground anymore. If he had any morality, he would have resigned earlier,” said Delhi Congress leader and former MP Sandeep Dikshit. Asked about the two Opposition parties being allies nationally, Dikshit said: “That is at the national level. But in Delhi, our fight is against Arvind Kejriwal.”
Echoing similar views, a senior Congress leader said the party does not want the AAP to expand too much. “They knew that an alliance in Haryana would have benefitted them. Hence, they wanted an alliance with us. But it didn’t work out. Now, for Delhi elections – whenever it happens – it will be difficult for the two parties to come together,” said the leader.

According to another party leader, Congress leader Bhupinder Singh Hooda opposed the alliance in Haryana. “While the central leadership may have some sympathy or may feel positively about the AAP, the state units are not inclined to ally with the party. The same thing happened in Haryana.”
“There is still a feeling in the Congress that Kejriwal is not to be trusted and hence, the party is cautious about him and AAP. He has announced that he will resign, but what is the motive? What impact will it have? We don’t know. Hence, we are waiting to see things pan out over the next few days,” said a senior Congress leader Sunday.
Notably, while several INDIA bloc parties welcomed Kejriwal’s bail on Friday, the Congress top leadership, including the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha Rahul Gandhi and party chief Mallikarjun Kharge, had maintained a strategic silence over the Supreme Court verdict. When asked about the court order, Congress spokesperson Supriya Shrinate had refused to “comment on it per se”. Instead, she highlighted how the “(central investigative) agencies have been misused against rivals in the past 10 years”.
The differences between the Congress and AAP notwithstanding, several other INDIA bloc parties reiterated that “central agencies were being misused by the government to target the Opposition”.

Trinamool Congress’s (TMC) Sagarika Ghose said the BJP, unable to handle electoral defeats, has tried every trick in the book to try and undermine and dislodge the AAP CM. “Kejriwal has consistently challenged and defeated the BJP in Delhi for the last decade. The BJP and the unelected Delhi LG have been interfering daily in the AAP government’s functioning and preventing an elected government from working,” she said.
Terming the resignation a “courageous step”, she said, “The BJP is repeatedly misusing central agencies like CBI and ED in a most disgraceful and unconstitutional manner to attack every opposition leader. Kejriwal has called the BJP’s bluff and shown that he remains one step ahead of the BJP”.
CPI’s D Raja shared similar views on the misuse of central agencies. However, he said the resignation is Kejriwal’s prerogative. “He will have to explain to the people why he is doing so because he is an elected person. That is between him, his party and the people.
They have not consulted INDIA bloc parties. It is their (AAP’s) independent decision. It is for the party to explain to the people what is their future course of action,” Raja said.

Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) MP Manoj Jha said there was a need to pay attention to what the court said while granting bail. “Apart from his statement (on resignation), there is a need to pay attention to that too. When Hemant Soren ji was released, what did the Supreme Court say? We need to pay attention to that. What did the court say when Arvind Kejriwal was granted bail? It is important to note what the court. It is important to see that through these institutions, the political game is being played by the BJP. I feel there will be a full stop to it. There will be an end to political vendetta started by two people in the last 10 years,” he said.
==============================
Title:One nation, one election in this term; coalition won’t stall any reforms: Govt
Date: 2024-09-16T10:10
Synopsys: Preparations started for conducting the Census, but a decision is yet to be taken on including a column on caste, says top government functionary.
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/one-nation-one-election-nda-bjp-coalition-reforms-govt-9569936/
Content: 
Despite the BJP being in a minority, the NDA government will implement “one nation, one election,” in its current tenure, a top government functionary said Sunday. This, even as he insisted that “there should be no confusion about the sthayi niti (policy stability) under a government elected for a third successive term after 60 years.”
The functionary said that there is no area where the NDA government, which completed 100 days of its third term Sunday, has not taken policy decisions to continue the work it had initiated 10 years ago: “Whether it is defence, space, external and home affairs, education, Digital India and making India a manufacturing hub, spending Rs 11 lakh crore annually on building infrastructure, mahila-yuva-garib-kisan (welfare of women, youth, poor and farmers), we are continuing with and taking forward the work that was started in 2014. Even our foreign policy has a reedh ki haddi (backbone) today, which it didn’t have under previous governments”.
Since he brought in the BJP to power with a majority in 2014, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been advocating for “One Nation, One Election” — holding elections to Lok Sabha, all state Legislative Assemblies, and urban and rural local bodies (municipalities and panchayats) at the same time.

In his latest Independence Day address, too, he made a strong pitch for it, contending that frequent polls were creating hurdles in the country’s progress. A high-level committee, headed by former president Ram Nath Kovind, in March this year recommended simultaneous elections for the Lok Sabha and state assemblies as the first step followed by synchronised local body polls within 100 days.
Also read | One Nation, One Election: Highlights of the Kovind panel’s recommendations
This requires a Constitutional amendment but, as a first step, to hold the Lok Sabha and state elections together, a ratification by states will not be required for the amendment, once it is approved by Parliament. In the second step, elections to municipalities and the panchayats will be synchronised with elections to Lok Sabha and Assemblies in such a way that local body elections are held within 100 days of the elections to Lok Sabha and Assemblies. This will require ratification by not less than one-half of the states.
The source said the Government had started preparations for conducting the Census, but a decision is yet to be taken on including a column on caste. “The process will begin soon” he said. The decadal census was not conducted in 2020 due to Covid-19 Pandemic.
Check out | As caste census demand rises, why there is need for a relook at the 1931 exercise
The BJP, which won 240 seats, relies on its allies including TDP, Janata Dal-United and Lok Janshakti Party (Ram Vilas) for its majority. Questions have been raised about their support to the one nation, one election plan but BJP leaders said that all these allies are on board and “arithmetic” would not get in the way of this “reform process.”

In August, the Centre was forced to withdraw an advertisement for filling up 45 key posts in the government through lateral entry within a day of “concerns” expressed by two of its allies, the JD(U) and LJP (Ram Vilas). Earlier, with some allies, including the JD(U), LJP and TDP, wary about the widespread changes proposed in the Waqf (Amendment) Bill, the government sent the legislation to a Joint Committee of Parliament.
Now, with the ruling party fighting election in Jammu and Kashmir, the functionary also said the BJP will consider possibilities of forming the government with Independents and smaller parties. “One thing is sure – neither the PDP, the National Conference nor the Congress will not be able to form the government there. There are 33 smaller parties contesting elections there,” he said.
As a marker, sources in the government said, projects worth at least Rs 15 lakh crore have been cleared in the first 100 days in the third term of this NDA government. Of these, projects worth Rs 3 lakh crore have been green-lit with focus on roads, railways, ports, and airways.
Arguing that the idea of employment being linked to only government jobs should be “corrected,” the top government functionary said that increasing capital expenditure to Rs 11.11 lakh crore in the infrastructure sector will lead to job creation. “The disillusionment and frustration (nirasha and hatasha) among youth over jobs is not just unfair to the government that has been taking several such steps, it’s an injustice to the youth also,” the functionary said.

In the health sector, under the Ayushman Bharat scheme, the government has extended the Rs 5 lakh per year coverage to every citizen over 70 years, and this is expected to benefit 6 crore senior citizens. The government has also increased 70,000 medical seats which “should ensure that no student would have to go abroad for medical studies,” the functionary said.
==============================
Title:Arrested BJP MLA Munirathna Naidu known for string of rows, in career spanning films to construction to politics
Date: 2024-09-16T14:09
Synopsys: The R R Nagar MLA had jumped ship from the Congress during the 2019 crisis and was later made a minister in the BJP-led government
Url: https://indianexpress.com/article/political-pulse/arrested-bjp-mla-munirathna-naidu-career-films-construction-politics-9570612/
Content: 
Not new to controversy, the BJP MLA from R R Nagar, Munirathna Naidu, finds himself in the middle of another one.
The MLA was arrested by the Bengaluru Police last week in connection with the alleged harassment of a contractor and use of abusive language against members of the Scheduled Caste (SC) community. An MP/MLA court later remanded him to two days’ custody.
In March last year, the police had booked Munirathna for an alleged hate speech against Christians. Initially, his opponent from Rajarajeshwarinagar, Kusuma H of the Congress filed a complaint with the city police over the speech and a case was registered based on a complaint of a gazetted officer, who accused him of promoting enmity between people.

The following month, a letter demanding the immediate arrest of Naidu, who was the Horticulture Minister then in the BJP government, in a hate speech case marked the beginning of a new chapter in the row between him and the Karnataka State Contractors’ Association.
Later that year, the association’s president, D Kempanna, and four other office-bearers were arrested in connection with a defamation case that Munirathna had filed against them. Kempanna had implied, without naming Munirathna, that the minister was threatening officials to extort money.
Munirathna began his political career as a councillor from Yeshwanthpur in North Bangalore and first became an MLA in 2013. “From being a rowdy who was kicked around by the Bangalore police, he is now kicking policemen around,” sources in the police said.
A legislator from the Rajarajeshwarinagar constituency, Munirathna was elected twice – in 2013 and 2018 – on a Congress ticket. He jumped ship to the BJP during the political turmoil in 2019 and a year later won the bypoll as the BJP nominee. The following year, in August, he was inducted into the Cabinet as the Minister of Horticulture, and Planning, Programme Monitoring and Statistics.

In 2018, the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) named the 58-year-old film producer and contractor-turned-politician in connection with a fake bill scam in the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP). The scam, dating back to 2014, was related to the execution of civic works worth Rs 1,500 crore in the Rajarajeshwarinagar, Malleshwaram, and Gandhinagar constituencies. It was alleged that bills were raised more than once for the same work in some cases, while in others they were claimed for projects that were not even taken up. Munirathna who was a Congress MLA at the time was accused number four in the chargesheet.
Another major case in 2018, where Munirathna found himself entangled was the seizure of around 9,800 voter IDs from an apartment in Jalahalli. Munirathna and 13 others were accused and booked. In 2020, the Karnataka High Court ordered a re-examination of chargesheets filed in connection with the case in response to a Public Interest Litigation plea which alleged lapses in the investigation.
Munirathna is known to be associated with contractors in Bengaluru city who control various city projects and was seen to be closely associated with Congress leaders like Ramalinga Reddy and D K Shivakumar.
The former minister has also dabbled in films. He is seen to be close to former Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy and produced a film featuring his son and actor-turned-politician Nikhil Kumaraswamy. He also produced the Rajnikanth blockbuster Lingaa.

Munirathna is also infamous as the contractor associated with the BBMP wall collapse case in central Bengaluru on June 1, 2010, in which a 17-year-old college girl Sanjana Singh died.
==============================
